# CHAPTER 34 FARADAY’S LAW OF INDUCTION
We can often anticipate the outcome of an experiment by considering how it is related by symmetry to other experiments. For example, a current loop in a magnetic field experiences a torque (due to the field) that rotates the loop. Consider a similar situation: a loop of wire in which there is no current is placed in a magnetic field, and a torque applied by an external agent rotates the loop. We find that a current appears in the loop! For a loop of wire in a magnetic field, a current produces a torque, and a torque produces a current. This is an example of the symmetry of nature.

We can understand and analyze the appearance of current in the loop based on Faraday’s law of induction, which is the subject of this chapter. Faraday’s law, which is one of the four Maxwell equations, can be directly demonstrated from a number of simple experiments that can easily be done in the laboratory.

## 34-1 FARADAY’S EXPERIMENTS
Faraday’s law of induction was discovered through experiments carried out by Michael Faraday in England in 1831 and by Joseph Henry in the United States at about the same time.* Even though Faraday published his results first, which gives him priority of discovery, the SI unit of inductance (see Chapter 36) is called the henry (abbreviation H). On the other hand, the SI unit of capacitance is, as we have seen, called the farad (abbreviation F). In Chapter 36, where we discuss oscillations in capacitative-inductive circuits, we see how appropriate it is to link the names of these two talented contemporaries in a single context.

Figure 34-1 shows a coil of wire as a part of a circuit containing an ammeter. Normally, we would expect the ammeter to show no current in the circuit because there seems to be no electromotive force. However, if we push a bar magnet toward the coil, with its north pole facing the coil, a remarkable thing happens. While the magnet is moving, the ammeter deflects, showing that a current has been set up in the coil. If we hold the magnet stationary with respect to the coil, the ammeter does not deflect. If we move the magnet away from the coil, the meter again deflects, but in the opposite direction, which means that the current in the coil is in the opposite direction. If we use the south pole end of a magnet instead of the north pole end, the experiment works as described but the deflections are reversed. The faster the magnet is moved, the greater is the reading of the meter. Further experimentation shows that what matters is the relative motion of the magnet and the coil. It makes no difference whether we move the magnet toward the coil or the coil toward the magnet.

*In addition to their independent simultaneous discovery of the law of induction, Faraday and Henry had several other similarities in their lives. Both were apprentices at an early age. Faraday, at age 14, was apprenticed to a London bookbinder. Henry, at age 13, was apprenticed to a watchmaker in Albany, New York. In later years Faraday was appointed director of the Royal Institution in London, whose founding was due in large part to an American, Benjamin Thompson (Count Rumford). Henry, on the other hand, became secretary of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, DC, which was founded by an endowment from an Englishman, James Smithson.

The current that appears in this experiment is called an induced current and is said to be set up by an induced electromotive force. Note that there are no batteries anywhere in the circuit. From experiments like this, Faraday was able to deduce the law that gives the magnitude and direction of the induced emfs. Such emfs are very important in practice. The chances are good that the lights in the room in which you are reading this book are operated from an induced emf produced in a commercial electric generator.

In another experiment, the apparatus of Fig. 34-2 is used. The coils are placed close together but at rest with respect to each other. When we close the switch S, thus setting up a steady current in the right-hand coil, the meter in the left-hand coil deflects momentarily. When we open the switch, thus interrupting this current, the meter again deflects momentarily, but in the opposite direction. None of the apparatus is physically moving in this experiment.

Experiment shows that there is an induced emf in the left coil of Fig. 34-2 whenever the current in the right coil is changing. It is the rate at which the current is changing and not the size of the current that is significant.

The common feature of these two experiments is motion or change. It is the moving magnet or the changing current that is responsible for the induced emfs. In the next section, we give the mathematical basis for these effects.

## 34-2 FARADAY’S LAW OF INDUCTION
Imagine that there are lines of magnetic field coming from the bar magnet of Fig. 34-1 and from the right-hand current loop in Fig. 34-2. Some of those field lines pass through the left-hand coil in both figures. As the magnet is moved in the situation of Fig. 34-1, or as the switch is opened or closed in Fig. 34-2, the number of lines of the magnetic field passing through the left-hand coil changes. As Faraday’s experiments showed and as Faraday’s technique of field lines helps us visualize, it is the change in the number of field lines passing through a circuit loop that induces the emf in the loop. Specifically, it is the rate of change in the number of field lines passing through the loop that determines the induced emf.

To make this statement quantitative, we introduce the magnetic flux $\Phi_{B}$. Like the electric flux (see Section 27-3), the magnetic flux can be considered to be a measure of the number of field lines passing through a surface. In analogy with the electric flux (see Eq. 27-7), the magnetic flux through any surface is defined as:
$$
\Phi_{B}=\int \vec{B} \cdot d \vec{A} \quad(34-1)
$$
Here $d \overrightarrow{A}$ is an element of area of the surface (shown in Fig. 34-3), and the integration is carried out over the entire surface through which we wish to calculate the flux (for example, the surface enclosed by the loop in Fig. 34-1). If the magnetic field has a constant magnitude and direction over a planar area A the flux can be written:
$$
\Phi_{B}=B A \cos \theta \quad(34-2)
$$
where $\theta$ is the angle between the normal to the surface and the direction of the field.

The SI unit of magnetic flux is the tesla-meter², which is given the name of weber (abbreviation Wb); that is:
$$
1 \text{ weber} = 1 \text{ tesla} \cdot \text{meter}^2
$$
Inverting this relationship, we see that the tesla is equivalent to the weber/meter², which was the unit used for magnetic fields before the tesla was adopted as the SI unit.

In terms of the magnetic flux, the emf induced in a circuit is given by Faraday's law of induction:
The magnitude of the induced emf in a circuit is equal to the rate at which the magnetic flux through the circuit is changing with time.

In mathematical terms, Faraday’s law is:
$$
|\mathscr{E}|=\left|\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}\right| \quad(34-3)
$$
where $\mathscr{E}$ is the induced emf. If the rate of change of flux is in units of webers per second, the emf has units of volts. We consider the direction (or sign) of the emf in the next section.

If the coil consists of N turns, then an induced emf appears in every turn, and the total induced emf in the circuit is the sum of the individual values, just as in the case of batteries connected in series. If the coil is so tightly wound that each turn may be considered to occupy the same region of space and therefore to experience the same change of flux, then the total induced emf is:
$$
|\mathscr{E}|=N\left|\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}\right| \quad(34-4)
$$

There are many ways of changing the flux through a loop: moving a magnet relative to the loop (as in Fig. 34-1), changing the current in a nearby circuit (as in Fig. 34-2 and also as in a transformer), moving the loop in a nonuniform field, rotating the loop in a fixed magnetic field such that the angle $\theta$ (Eq. 34-2) changes (as in a generator, which we discuss in Section 34-5), or changing the size or shape of the loop. In each of these methods, an emf is induced in the loop.

Finally, we note that, even though Eq. 34-3 is known as Faraday’s law, it was not written in that form by Faraday, who was untrained in mathematics. In fact, Faraday’s three-volume published work on electromagnetism, a landmark achievement in the development of physics and chemistry, contains not a single equation!

### SAMPLE PROBLEM 34-1
The long solenoid S of Fig. 34-4 has 220 turns/cm; its diameter d is 3.2 cm. At its center we place a 130-turn close-packed coil C of diameter $d_{C}=2.1\ \text{cm}$. The current in the solenoid is increased from zero to 1.5 A at a steady rate over a period of 0.16 s. What is the absolute value (that is, the magnitude without regard for sign) of the induced emf that appears in the central coil while the current in the solenoid is being changed?

**Solution**  
In this case the flux through the coil C is changing because the field B in the interior of the solenoid varies as the current changes. The field is uniform and perpendicular to the area of each turn of coil C, so $\Phi_{B}=\int \overrightarrow{B} \cdot d \overrightarrow{A}=B A$, where A is the area of each turn of the inner coil. Faraday’s law gives:
$$
|\mathscr{E}|=N\left|\frac{\Delta \Phi_{B}}{\Delta t}\right|=N\left|\frac{A \Delta B}{\Delta t}\right|=N A\left|\frac{\mu_{0} n \Delta i}{\Delta t}\right|=N A \mu_{0} n\left|\frac{\Delta i}{\Delta t}\right|
$$
where we have used $B=\mu_{0} n i$ for the field of an ideal solenoid (Eq. 33-28). The area A of the central coil is $\frac{1}{4} \pi d_{C}^{2}=3.46 \times 10^{-4}\ \text{m}^2$. The current changes by 1.5 A in 0.16 s. The emf is then:
$$
\begin{aligned}
|\mathscr{E}|&= (130)\left(3.46 \times 10^{-4}\ \text{m}^2\right)\left(4 \pi \times 10^{-7}\ \text{T} \cdot \text{m/A}\right) \\
&\quad \times\left(2.2 \times 10^{4}\ \text{turns/m}\right) \frac{1.5\ \text{A}}{0.16\ \text{s}} \\
&= 1.2 \times 10^{-2}\ \text{V}=12\ \text{mV}
\end{aligned}
$$

We shall explain in the next section how to find the direction of the induced emf. We can preview that discussion with the following argument. Suppose an increase in the flux from the outer coil caused a current in the inner coil that produced a magnetic field in the same direction as the original field. This would in turn increase the flux through the area enclosed by the outer coil, which should similarly cause its current to increase, thereby increasing again the current in the inner coil, and so on. Is this a reasonable outcome?

## 34-3 LENZ’ LAW
So far we have not specified the direction of the induced emf. Later in this chapter we discuss the relationship between induced emf and induced electric field, which allows us to write Faraday’s law without the absolute magnitude bars. For now, we determine the direction of the induced emf based on the (induced) current that it would produce, using a rule proposed in 1834 by Heinrich Lenz (1804-1865) and known as Lenz’ law:
The flux of the magnetic field due to the induced current opposes the change in flux that causes the induced current.

Lenz’ law refers to induced currents, which means that it applies only to closed conducting circuits. If the circuit is open, we can usually think in terms of what would happen if it were closed and in this way find the direction of the induced emf.

If the “change in flux” is an increase, then Lenz’ law requires that the direction of the induced current oppose the increase; that is, the flux from the magnetic field of the induced current would pass through the loop in a direction opposite to that of the original flux that is increasing. If the “change in flux” is a decrease, the flux from the magnetic field of the induced current opposes the decrease; that is, it tends to add to the original flux to keep it from decreasing.

As an example of the application of Lenz’ law, let us consider the first of Faraday’s experiments shown in Fig. 34-1. As the north pole of the magnet is moved toward the loop, the flux through the loop increases. This increase in flux is the “change” to which Lenz’ law refers. The current in the loop must oppose this change; that is, the current must set up a magnetic field that points in the opposite direction inside the loop. Figure 34-5 shows the direction of the induced current. Using the right-hand rule, you can see that inside the loop the magnetic field set up by the induced current is in a direction opposite to that of the magnet.

If, on the other hand, we moved the magnet away from the loop, the flux would decrease, and the induced current must oppose this decrease. Therefore, the magnetic field due to the induced current must add to the field of the magnet inside the loop, so the current would be in the opposite direction to that shown in Fig. 34-5.

Another way to interpret Lenz’ law is based on the principle of conservation of energy. When the magnet is moved toward the loop, the field due to the induced current in the loop exerts a force that opposes the motion of the magnet, as indicated in Fig. 34-6. The loop sets up a magnetic field similar to that of a magnet with its north pole toward the north pole of the approaching magnet, and the two north poles repel one another. That is, we must exert a greater force to continue pushing the magnet toward the loop. Suppose instead that the current in the loop were in the opposite direction, so that it would set up an induced field in the opposite direction. Rather than being repelled by the field of the induced current, the magnet would be attracted by this field and would be accelerated toward the loop. As the magnet accelerates, the current in the loop would increase, causing an increasing force on the magnet and an increasing acceleration. Both the kinetic energy of the magnet and the rate of Joule ($i^{2} R$) energy dissipation in the loop would increase. As a result of a small initial push of the magnet toward the loop, we would get a large increase in energy—clearly a violation of conservation of energy. This cannot occur, and so we conclude that the field due to the induced current must oppose the motion of the magnet toward the loop. Similarly, if we were to move the magnet away from the loop, the induced field would oppose this motion and would pull the magnet toward the loop.

In either case, it is not significant that the induced field opposes the field of the magnet, but rather that it opposes the change, which is an increase or decrease of flux through the loop. If in Fig. 34-5 the field of the magnet points to the left and is increasing (as the magnet moves toward the loop), the induced field must point to the right inside the loop. If the field of the magnet points to the left and is decreasing (as the magnet moves away from the loop), the induced field must point to the left inside the loop. If the magnet were turned around so that the south pole moved toward the loop, the field would point to the right and increase, so that the induced field would point to the left inside the loop.

We can now obtain the direction of the current in the small coil C of Sample Problem 34-1. The field of the solenoid S points to the right in Fig. 34-4 and is increasing. The induced current in C must oppose this increase in flux through C and so must set up a field that opposes the field of S. The current in C is therefore in a direction opposite to that in S. If the current in S were decreasing instead of increasing, a similar argument shows that the induced current in C would have the same direction as the current in S.

### Signs in Faraday’s Law
So far we have written Faraday’s law in terms of magnitudes only. The direction and magnitude of the induced current in a conducting loop can be determined using Lenz’ law and the magnitude-only version of Faraday’s law.

We would like now to remove the absolute magnitude bars from Faraday’s law (Eq. 34-3). Before we do so, we must clarify ambiguities in sign that exist on both sides of the equation. If we want to write $\mathscr{E}$ instead of $|\mathscr{E}|$, we must specify what we mean by the sign or the direction of an induced emf. Consider the simple one-loop circuit of Fig. 34-7a, which may include several batteries and resistors. To analyze this circuit we could use the loop rule. It should be clear that if we travel around clockwise, add up all the emfs, and find a net positive value, then the current will also be clockwise. (Only in that way can the total potential differences across the resistors be negative, in order to satisfy the loop theorem.) For real circuits, the direction of positive current is the same as the direction of travel around the loop in which we would obtain a net positive emf. We can make the same connection for induced currents and emfs: the direction of the induced current is the direction around the loop that we travel to obtain a positive emf.

The sign of the right side of Eq. 34-3 also presents us with a difficulty. When we discussed Gauss’ law, which involved the flux through a closed surface, we defined the direction of $d \overrightarrow{A}$ to be that of the outward normal through the closed surface. However, the surfaces bounded by the current loops to which we apply Faraday’s law are open surfaces, and so it appears that we could choose $d \overrightarrow{A}$ to be normal to the surface in either direction (such as for the surface bounded by the loop in Fig. 34-5). The solution to this dilemma is yet another right-hand rule: point the fingers of your right hand in the direction around the loop that you will use to calculate the emf. (For actual wire current loops, this is the same direction as the direction of the induced current.) Your thumb will then point in the direction that we take for $d \overrightarrow{A}$ in calculating the flux (Fig. 34-7b).

With these definitions of the direction or sense of the emf and the direction of $d \overrightarrow{A}$ for finding the flux, we can write Faraday’s law as:
$$
\mathscr{E}=-\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t} \quad(34-5)
$$
The negative sign in this equation is in effect an expression of Lenz’ law, so that the induced emf opposes the change in flux.

Figure 34-7c shows how to use Eq. 34-5. Suppose $\overrightarrow{B}$ is downward through the loop and increasing in magnitude. Let us pick the upward direction for $d \overrightarrow{A}$. (As long as we use the right-hand rule, it does not matter which direction we pick—it is the relationship between $\mathscr{E}$ and $d\overrightarrow{A}$ that is important.) For this choice $\overrightarrow{B} \cdot d \overrightarrow{A}$ is negative everywhere on the surface, so the flux is negative. If $\overrightarrow{B}$ is increasing in magnitude, then $\Phi_{B}$ is negative and increasing in magnitude, so $d \Phi_{B} / d t<0$. Equation 34-5 then tells us that $\mathscr{E}$ is positive relative to the direction we chose for $d \overrightarrow{A}$. The right-hand rule shows that the emf (and thus the induced current) must be as indicated in Fig. 34-7c. The induced current would be counterclockwise as viewed from above, just as we would have concluded by applying Lenz’ law directly.

### SAMPLE PROBLEM 34-2
A circular loop of wire of radius $r=0.32\ \text{m}$ and resistance $R=2.5\ \Omega$ is placed in a uniform magnetic field that is perpendicular to the plane of the loop and initially directed into the page, as shown in Fig. 34-8. The field varies with time as $B_{z}=-4.0\ \text{T}-(5.6\ \text{T/s}) t+(2.2\ \text{T/s}^2) t^2$, where the positive z axis is up out of the page. Find the magnitude and direction of the current in the loop at $t=1\ \text{s}$ and at $t=2\ \text{s}$.

**Solution**  
Let us choose $d \overrightarrow{A}$ into the page. At $t=1\ \text{s}$, $B_{z}=-7.4\ \text{T}$, and at $t=2\ \text{s}$, $B_{z}=-6.4\ \text{T}$. Thus for the time intervals covered by this problem, $\overrightarrow{B}$ and $d \overrightarrow{A}$ are parallel and $\Phi_{B}>0$. Because the field is uniform over the loop, $\Phi_{B}=\overrightarrow{B} \cdot \overrightarrow{A}=B_{z} A_{z}$ (which is a positive quantity, because $A_{z}<0$). Faraday's law then gives:
$$
\mathscr{E}=-\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}=-\frac{d\left(B_{z} A_{z}\right)}{d t}=-A_{z} \frac{d B_{z}}{d t}
$$

The direction of the emf depends on the sign of $d B_{z} / d t=-5.6 + 4.4t$. At $t=1\ \text{s}$, $d B_{z} / d t=-1.2\ \text{T/s}$. With $A=\pi r^{2}=0.322\ \text{m}^2$, we have $\mathscr{E}=-(-0.322\ \text{m}^2)(-1.2\ \text{T/m})=-0.39\ \text{V}$. The negative sign means that, with the thumb of the right hand pointed in the direction of $\vec{A}$ (into the page), the direction of the emf (and thus the current) is counterclockwise. The magnitude of the current is $i=|\mathscr{E}| / R=0.15\ \text{A}$. You should check that the same direction for the current (counterclockwise) is obtained from Lenz’ law.

Repeating the calculation for $t=2\ \text{s}$, we find $d B_{z} / d t=+3.2\ \text{T/s}$ and $\mathscr{E}=+1.03\ \text{V}$. This gives a clockwise current of magnitude $i=|\mathscr{E}| / R=0.37\ \text{A}$.

Note that the direction of the current changes between $t=1\ \text{s}$ and $t=2\ \text{s}$ even though the direction of the field remains the same (into the page). It is the direction of the change in the field rather than the direction of the field itself that determines the direction of the induced current.

## 34-4 MOTIONAL EMF
Figure 34-9 shows a rectangular loop of wire of width D, one end of which is in a uniform and constant field $\overrightarrow{B}$ pointing at right angles to the plane of the loop. The field $\overrightarrow{B}$ may be produced, for example, in the gap of a large electromagnet. The dashed lines show the assumed limits of the magnetic field. The loop is pulled to the right at a constant speed v.

The situation described by Fig. 34-9 does not differ in any essential detail from that of Fig. 34-5. In each case a conducting loop and a magnet are in relative motion; in each case the flux of the field of the magnet through the loop is being caused to change with time. The important difference between the two arrangements is that the situation of Fig. 34-9 permits easier calculations.

The external agent (the hand in Fig. 34-9) pulls the loop to the right at constant speed. As the loop moves, the portion of the area of the loop in the field decreases, and so the flux decreases. This decreasing flux induces an emf, and an induced current flows in the loop. This emf, which results from relative motion between a conductor and the source of the magnetic field, is sometimes called a motional emf.

The flux $\Phi_{B}$ enclosed by the loop in Fig. 34-9 is:
$$
\Phi_{B}=B A=B D x
$$
where $D x$ is the area of that part of the loop in which B is not zero. We find the emf $\mathscr{E}$ from Faraday’s law:
$$
|\mathscr{E}|=\left|\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}\right|=\frac{d}{d t}(B D x)=B D \frac{d x}{d t}=B D v \quad(34-6)
$$
where we have set $dx/dt$ equal to the speed v at which the loop is pulled out of the magnetic field. Note that the only dimension of the loop that enters into Eq. 34-6 is the length D of the left end conductor. As we shall see in Section 34-7, the induced emf in Fig. 34-9 may be regarded as localized in the left end of the loop.

The emf $BDv$ sets up a current in the loop given by:
$$
i=\frac{|\mathscr{E}|}{R}=\frac{B D v}{R} \quad(34-7)
$$
where R is the loop resistance. From Lenz’ law, this current must be clockwise in Fig. 34-9; it opposes the “change” (the decrease in $\Phi_{B}$) by setting up a field that is parallel to the external field within the loop.

The sides of the loop, which we regard as current-carrying conductors, experience magnetic forces $\overrightarrow{F}_{B}=i \overrightarrow{L} \times \overrightarrow{B}$ (see Eq. 32-26), as shown in Fig. 34-9. Because $\overrightarrow{F}_{2}$ and $\overrightarrow{F}_{3}$ are equal and opposite, their effects cancel. The net magnetic force on the loop is given by $\overrightarrow{F}_{1}$, and in order to move the loop at constant speed the external agent must exert a force equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to $\overrightarrow{F}_{1}$. Let us calculate the mechanical power $P=F v$ that must be expended by the external agent or, equivalently, the rate at which the external agent does work on the loop.

The magnitude of the force $\overrightarrow{F}_{1}$ is $F_{1}=i D B$ because the direction of the current is always perpendicular to $\overrightarrow{B}$. Since the external agent must exert a force equal to $F_{1}$, the power expended by the agent is:
$$
P=F_{1} v=i D B v=\frac{B^{2} D^{2} v^{2}}{R} \quad(34-8)
$$
where we have used Eq. 34-7 for the induced current $i$.

We can also compute the rate at which energy is dissipated in the loop as a result of Joule heating by the induced current. This is given by:
$$
P=i^{2} R=\left(\frac{B D v}{R}\right)^{2} R=\frac{B^{2} D^{2} v^{2}}{R} \quad(34-9)
$$
which agrees precisely with Eq. 34-8 for the rate at which mechanical work is done on the loop. The work done by the external agent is eventually dissipated as Joule heating of the loop.

### Eddy Currents
When the magnetic flux through a large piece of conducting material changes, induced currents appear in the material (Fig. 34-10). These currents are called eddy currents. In some cases, the eddy currents may produce undesirable effects. For example, they increase the internal energy and thus can increase the temperature of the material. For this reason, materials that are subject to changing magnetic field are often laminated or constructed in many small layers insulated from one another. Instead of one large loop, the eddy currents follow many smaller loops, thereby increasing the total length of their paths and the corresponding resistance: the resistive heating $\mathscr{E}^{2} / R$ is smaller, and the increase in internal energy is smaller. On the other hand, eddy-current heating can be used to advantage, as in an induction furnace, in which a sample of material can be heated using a rapidly changing magnetic field. Induction furnaces are used in cases in which it is not possible to make thermal contact with the material to be heated, such as when it is enclosed in a vacuum chamber.

Eddy currents are real currents and produce the same effects as real currents. In particular, a force $\overrightarrow{F}_{B}=i \overrightarrow{L} \times \overrightarrow{B}$ is exerted on the part of the eddy-current path in Fig. 34-10 that passes through the field. This force is transmitted to the material, and Lenz’ law can be used to show (see Question 25) that the force opposes the motion of the conductor. This gives rise to a form of magnetic braking, in which magnetic fields applied to a rotating wheel or a moving track produce forces that decelerate the motion. Such a brake has no moving parts or mechanical linkages and is not subject to the frictional wear of ordinary mechanical brakes. Moreover, it is most efficient at high speed (because the magnetic force increases with the relative speed), where the wear on mechanical brakes would be greatest.

### SAMPLE PROBLEM 34-3
Figure 34-11a shows a rectangular loop of resistance R, width D, and length a being pulled at constant speed v through a region of thickness d in which a uniform magnetic field $\overrightarrow{B}$ is set up by a magnet. As functions of the position x of the right-hand edge of the loop, plot (a) the flux $\Phi_{B}$ through the loop, (b) the induced current $i$, and (c) the rate P of production of internal energy in the loop. Use $D=4\ \text{cm}$, $a=10\ \text{cm}$, $d=15\ \text{cm}$, $R=16\ \Omega$, $B=2.0\ \text{T}$ and $v=1.0\ \text{m/s}$.

**Solution**  
(a) The flux $\Phi_{B}$ is zero when the loop is not in the field; it is $BDa$ when the loop is entirely in the field; it is $BDx$ when the loop is entering the field and $B D[a-(x-d)]$ when the loop is leaving the field. These conclusions, which you should verify, are shown graphically in Fig. 34-11b.

(b) The magnitude of the induced emf $\mathscr{E}$ is given by $\mathscr{E}=\left|d \Phi_{B} / d t\right|$, which we can write as:
$$
\mathscr{E}=\left|\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}\right|=\left|\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d x} \frac{d x}{d t}\right|=\left|\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d x} v\right|
$$
where $d \Phi_{B} / d x$ is the slope of the curve of Fig. 34-11b. The current $i$ is plotted as a function of x in Fig. 34-11c. Using the same type of reasoning as that used for Fig. 34-8, we deduce from Lenz’ law that when the loop is entering the field, the current is counterclockwise as seen from above. Note that there is no current when the loop is entirely in the magnetic field because the flux $\Phi_{B}$ through the loop is not changing with time, as Fig. 34-11b shows.

(c) The rate of internal energy production is given by $P=i^{2} R$. It may be calculated by squaring the ordinate of the curve of Fig. 34-11c and multiplying by R. The result is plotted in Fig. 34-11d.

If the fringing of the magnetic field, which cannot be avoided in practice (see Problem 11 of Chapter 33), is taken into account, the sharp bends and corners in Fig. 34-11 will be replaced by smooth curves.

### SAMPLE PROBLEM 34-4
A copper rod of length R rotates at angular frequency $\omega$ in a uniform magnetic field $\overrightarrow{B}$ as shown in Fig. 34-12. Find the emf $\mathscr{E}$ developed between the two ends of the rod. (We might measure this emf by placing a conducting rail along the dashed circle in the figure and connecting a voltmeter between the rail and point O.)

**Solution**  
If a wire of length $d r$ is moved at velocity $\vec{v}$ at right angles to a field $\overrightarrow{B}$, a motional emf $d\mathscr{E}$ will be developed (see Eq. 34-6) given by:
$$
d\mathscr{E}=B v d r
$$

The rod of Fig. 34-12 may be divided into elements of length $d r$, the linear speed v of each element being $\omega r$. Each element is perpendicular to $\overrightarrow{B}$ and is also moving in a direction at right angles to B so that, since the emfs $d\mathscr{E}$ of each element are “in series,”
$$
\mathscr{E}=\int d \mathscr{E}=\int_{0}^{R} B v d r=\int_{0}^{R} B \omega r d r=\frac{1}{2} B \omega R^{2}
$$

For a second approach, consider that at any instant the flux enclosed by the sector $aOb$ in Fig. 34-12 is given by:
$$
\Phi_{B}=B A=B\left(\frac{1}{2} R^{2} \theta\right)
$$
where $\frac{1}{2} R^{2} \theta$ is the area of the sector. Differentiating gives:
$$
\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}=\frac{1}{2} B R^{2} \frac{d \theta}{d t}=\frac{1}{2} B \omega R^{2}
$$

From Faraday’s law, this is precisely the magnitude of $\mathscr{E}$ and agrees with the previous result.

## 34-5 GENERATORS AND MOTORS
As examples of the practical consequences of Faraday’s law, we consider the operation of simple generators and motors.

Figure 34-13 shows the basic elements of a generator. A loop of conducting wire rotates with constant angular velocity $\omega$ in an external magnetic field. (Another device, not shown in the figure, is needed to cause the loop to rotate. In electrical power plants, the additional device might be falling water from a dam or steam produced in a boiler that turns the blades of a turbine.) For simplicity we assume that the magnetic field is uniform in the region in which the loop rotates.

The magnetic flux through the loop is given by Eq. 34-2: $\Phi_{B}=B A \cos \theta$. As the loop rotates, the angle $\theta$ between the directions of the magnetic field and the area elements $d \overrightarrow{A}$ within the loop changes with time according to $\theta=\omega t$. The emf induced in the rotating loop is:
$$
\mathscr{E}=-\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}=-B A \frac{d}{d t}(\cos \omega t)=B A \omega \sin \omega t \quad(34-10)
$$

If the loop has N turns, the total flux is multiplied by N so that the emf would be $\mathscr{E}=N B A \omega \sin \omega t$.

The induced emf varies sinusoidally with time, as shown in Fig. 34-14. If the generator is connected to an external load of resistance R, an induced current $i=\mathscr{E} / R$ occurs in the circuit; this current flows through the rotating loop and the wires connected to the load.

Figure 34-14 suggests that the current changes direction as the loop rotates. A current that changes direction is called an alternating current (abbreviated AC). The emf produced by this generator is called an AC emf or an AC voltage.

Let us now consider the direction of the induced current in the loop. When the loop is in the position shown in Fig. 34-13, a small rotation in the direction of $\omega$ would decrease the flux, and so (by Lenz’ law) the induced current in the loop must produce a field in the same direction as the external field (thereby opposing the decrease in the flux). The induced current is therefore counterclockwise, as shown. As the plane of the loop becomes parallel to the field ($\theta=90^{\circ}$), the flux is changing most rapidly and the counterclockwise current reaches its maximum magnitude. From $\theta=90^{\circ}$ to $\theta=180^{\circ}$, the flux is becoming increasingly negative, so the current must continue in the counterclockwise direction to oppose the change in flux. Eventually the loop rotates through $\theta=180^{\circ}$ and the negative flux begins to increase toward zero. The induced current must now be in the clockwise direction, producing a downward field inside the loop that opposes the change in flux. Continuing this reasoning, we conclude that the current changes direction whenever the loop rotates through 180°.

Generators of a more complex design than that shown here are used in electrical power plants to produce the AC voltage that we use in our homes. A similar device known as an alternator is used in automobiles; in an alternator the source of the magnetic field (a small permanent magnet) rotates, while the loop in which the current is induced remains fixed.

So far it appears that we can get “free” electricity from our generator. If we could design a rotating loop with frictionless bearings, once we set it rotating with a given angular velocity, the induced current should continue indefinitely in the external load. Unlimited work would be done in the external load with no investment of energy. Surely there must be something wrong with this reasoning, which violates conservation of energy!

Even in the absence of friction, there is a torque that inhibits the loop from rotating. When current flows in the loop, there is a magnetic torque given by Eq. 32-34 ($\tau=N i A B \sin \theta$). It does not matter whether the current is produced by a battery or by motion in a magnetic field; there is still a torque on the current loop. In the situation shown in Fig. 34-13, the torque acts to push the plane of the loop toward $\theta=0$ and so it opposes the rotation. In fact, you should convince yourself that the torque remains in the same direction even when the loop passes through $\theta=180^{\circ}$ and the current changes direction. To oppose this torque, the device that is producing the rotation of the loop must continue to do work as the loop rotates. The generator can thus be viewed as a device for converting mechanical work (the rotation of the loop) into electrical work in the load. The electrical energy produced by the generator is ultimately derived from the energy supplied by the agent that keeps the loop rotating.

An electric motor is simply a generator operating in reverse. We disconnect the external source that is driving the rotation of the loop, and we replace the load in Fig. 34-13 with another generator, which produces an AC emf $\mathscr{E}$ that drives a current $i=\mathscr{E} / R$ in the loop. In this case there is again a magnetic torque on the loop that causes it to rotate. Just as the loop passes through $\theta=180^{\circ}$ where the torque is zero, the externally provided current changes direction, which keeps the torque in the same direction as the loop continues to rotate. Even though the current changes direction every half cycle, the magnetic torque remains in the same direction.

Once again, if we assume frictionless bearings, it appears we should be able to get something for nothing from our motor. If we make the resistance of the wires very small, then the current and the resulting torque become very large. An unlimited amount of mechanical work appears to be possible with only a small investment of electrical energy. What we have neglected is that the rotating loop produces an induced emf $\mathscr{E}_{ind}$ (known in the case of a motor as a “back emf”) given by Eq. 34-10. According to Lenz’ law, the back emf opposes the effect of the applied emf $\mathscr{E}$. When the motor first starts, $\omega$ is small, the back emf is small, and the current is $i=\mathscr{E} / R$. As the rotation picks up speed, the back emf increases and the current decreases to $i=(\mathscr{E}-\mathscr{E}_{ind}) / R$. As the rotation speed continues to increase, the back emf increases; when eventually $\mathscr{E}_{ind}=\mathscr{E}$, no current flows and the rotating motor can no longer supply any torque. If we apply a load to the motor (for example, a weight to be lifted), the rotation slows somewhat, so $\mathscr{E}_{ind}$ decreases and i increases—the source generator must provide additional electrical work. A motor can therefore be regarded as a device for converting electrical work (from the driving generator) into mechanical work.

Real generators and motors are somewhat more complicated than the ones we have discussed. Some generators use clever geometric arrangements of coil windings and pickup mechanisms to produce DC currents (which may vary in magnitude with time but do not change direction). Similarly, there are DC motors that operate with DC currents or voltages. Nevertheless, the basic operating principles are similar to the examples discussed here.

### SAMPLE PROBLEM 34-5
An electrical generator consists of a rectangular loop of dimensions 8.4 cm by 15.4 cm. It rotates in a uniform magnetic field of 0.126 T at a frequency of 60.0 Hz about an axis perpendicular to the field direction. What is the maximum emf generated by the loop?

**Solution**  
The maximum emf is given by Eq. 34-10 when $\sin \omega t=1$:
$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathscr{E}_{max}&=B A \omega \\
&=(0.126\ \text{T})(0.084\ \text{m} \times 0.154\ \text{m})\left(2 \pi \times 60\ \text{s}^{-1}\right) \\
&=0.61\ \text{V}
\end{aligned}
$$

## 34-6 INDUCED ELECTRIC FIELDS
Suppose we place a loop of conducting wire in an external magnetic field (as in Fig. 34-15a). The field, which we assume to have a uniform strength over the area of the loop, may be established by an external electromagnet. By varying the current in the electromagnet, we can vary the strength of the magnetic field.

As $\overrightarrow{B}$ is varied, the magnetic flux through the loop varies with time, and from Faraday’s and Lenz’ laws we can calculate the magnitude and direction of the induced emf and the induced current in the loop. Before the field began changing, there was no current in the loop; while the field is changing, charges flow in the loop. For charges to begin moving, they must be accelerated by an electric field. This induced electric field occurs with a changing magnetic field, according to Faraday’s law.

The induced electric field is as real as any that might be set up by static charges; for instance, it exerts a force $q_{0} \overrightarrow{E}$ on a test charge. Moreover, the presence of the electric field has nothing to do with the presence of the loop of wire; if we were to remove the loop completely, the electric field would still be present. We could fill the space with a “gas” of electrons or ionized atoms; these particles would experience this induced electric field $\overrightarrow{E}$.

Let us therefore replace the loop of wire with a circular path of arbitrary radius r (Fig. 34-15b). The path, which we take in a plane perpendicular to the direction of $\overrightarrow{B}$, encloses a region of space in which the magnetic field is changing at a rate $d \overrightarrow{B} / d t$. We assume that the rate $d \overrightarrow{B} / d t$ is the same at every point in the area enclosed by the path. The circular path encloses a flux $\Phi_{B}$ which is changing at a rate $d \Phi_{B} / d t$ because of the variation in the magnetic field. An induced emf appears around the path, and therefore there is an induced electric field at all points around the circle. From symmetry, we conclude that $\overrightarrow{E}$ must have the same magnitude at all points around the circle, there being no preferred direction in this space. Furthermore, $\overrightarrow{E}$ can have no radial component, a conclusion that follows from Gauss’ law: construct an imaginary cylindrical Gaussian surface perpendicular to the plane of Fig. 34-15a. If there were a radial component to $\overrightarrow{E}$, there would be a net electric flux into or out of the surface, which would require that the surface enclose a net electric charge. Since there is no such charge, the electric flux must be zero and the radial component of $\overrightarrow{E}$ must be zero. Thus the induced electric field is tangential, and the electric field lines are concentric circles, as in Fig. 34-15c.

Consider a test charge $q_{0}$ moving around the circular path of Fig. 34-15b. The work W done on the charge by the induced electric field in one revolution is $\mathscr{E} q_{0}$. Equivalently, we can express the work as the electric force $q_{0} E$ times the displacement $2 \pi r$ covered in one revolution. Setting these two expressions for W equal to one another and canceling the factor $q_{0}$, we obtain:
$$
\mathscr{E}=E(2 \pi r) \quad(34-11)
$$

The right side of Eq. 34-11 can be expressed as a line integral of $\overrightarrow{E}$ around the circle, which can be written in more general cases (for instance, when $\overrightarrow{E}$ is not constant or when the chosen closed path is not a circle) as:
$$
\mathscr{E}=\oint \vec{E} \cdot d \vec{s} \quad(34-12)
$$

Note that Eq. 34-12 reduces directly to Eq. 34-11 in our special case of a circular path with constant tangential $\overrightarrow{E}$.

Replacing the emf by Eq. 34-12, we can write Faraday’s law of induction ($\mathscr{E}=-d \Phi_{B} / d t$) as:
$$
\oint \vec{E} \cdot d \vec{s}=-\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t} \quad(34-13)
$$

It is in this form that Faraday’s law appears as one of the four basic Maxwell equations of electromagnetism. In this form, it is apparent that Faraday’s law implies that a changing magnetic field produces an electric field. The direction of the line integral is related to the direction of $d \overrightarrow{A}$ in $\Phi_{B}$ by the same right-hand rule discussed at the end of Section 34-3: with the fingers in the direction of $d \overrightarrow{s}$ around the closed integration path, the thumb indicates the direction of $d \overrightarrow{A}$.

In Fig. 34-15, we have assumed that the magnetic field is increasing: that is, both $d B / d t$ and $d \Phi_{B} / d t$ are positive. By Lenz’ law, the induced emf opposes this change, and thus the induced currents create a magnetic field that points out of the plane of the figure. Since the currents must be counterclockwise, the lines of induced electric field $\overrightarrow{E}$ (which is responsible for the current) must also be counterclockwise. If, on the other hand, the magnetic field were decreasing ($d B / d t<0$), the lines of induced electric field would be clockwise, such that the induced current again opposes the change in $\Phi_{B}$.

Faraday’s law in the form of Eq. 34-13 can be applied to paths of any geometry, not only the special circular path we chose in Fig. 34-15a. Figure 34-15d shows four such paths, all having the same shape and area but located in different positions in the changing field. For paths 1 and 2, the induced emf is the same because these paths lie entirely within the changing magnetic field and thus have the same value of $d \Phi_{B} / d t$. However, even though the emf $\mathscr{E}(=\oint \overrightarrow{E} \cdot d \overrightarrow{s})$ is the same for these two paths, the distribution of electric field vectors around the paths is different, as indicated by the lines of the electric field. For path 3, the emf is smaller because both $\Phi_{B}$ and $d \Phi_{B} / d t$ are smaller, and for path 4 the induced emf is zero, even though the electric field is not zero at any point along the path.

### Induced EMF and Potential Difference
In Chapter 26 we discussed electric fields produced by charges. Induced electric fields are produced not by charges but by a changing magnetic flux. Both kinds of electric fields can be detected by the forces they exert on charges, but there is an important difference between them: the lines of $\overrightarrow{E}$ associated with a changing magnetic flux form closed loops, but the lines of $\overrightarrow{E}$ associated with charges always start on a positive charge and end on a negative charge.

There is another difference between the two kinds of electric fields: electric fields produced by charges can be represented by a potential, but potential has no meaning for electric fields produced by a changing magnetic flux. In Chapter 28 we showed that the potential difference between two points in an electric field is (see Eq. 28-15):
$$
V_{b}-V_{a}=-\int_{a}^{b} \vec{E} \cdot d \vec{s} \quad(34-14)
$$

Because the electrostatic field associated with charges is conservative, the potential difference is independent of the path we travel between points a and b. If a and b are the same point, then the path connecting them is a closed loop, and Eq. 34-14 becomes:
$$
\oint \vec{E} \cdot d \vec{s}=0 \quad(34-15)
$$

Figure 34-16a illustrates this concept. If we connect the two leads of a voltmeter together in a field due to charges, the voltmeter reads zero.

Consider the contrasting case of the electric field produced by a changing magnetic field. In this case the integral of $\overrightarrow{E}$ around the closed path is not zero—now $\oint \overrightarrow{E} \cdot d \overrightarrow{s}$ is $-d \Phi_{B} / d t$ according to Faraday’s law. In Fig. 34-16b, the two leads of the voltmeter, still connected together, form a loop surrounding a solenoid in which the current is changing. In this case the voltmeter reading is not zero, and the concept of potential cannot be used to describe the situation. The induced electric field due to a changing magnetic field is nonconservative and cannot be represented by a potential. (The magnetic field due to a current is also nonconservative. The lines of magnetic field form closed loops, and the magnetic field also cannot be described by a potential.)

### SAMPLE PROBLEM 34-6
In Fig. 34-15b, assume that $R=8.5\ \text{cm}$ and that $d B / d t=0.13\ \text{T/s}$. (a) What is the magnitude of the electric field $\overrightarrow{E}$ for $r=5.2\ \text{cm}$? (b) What is the magnitude of the induced electric field for $r=12.5\ \text{cm}$?

**Solution**  
(a) The flux $\Phi_{B}$ through a closed circular path of radius r is (with $r<R$):
$$
\Phi_{B}=B\left(\pi r^{2}\right)
$$
so that Faraday’s law (Eq. 34-13) gives:
$$
E(2 \pi r)=-\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}=-\left(\pi r^{2}\right) \frac{d B}{d t}
$$

Solving for E and taking magnitudes, we find:
$$
E=\frac{1}{2}\left|\frac{d B}{d t}\right| r \quad(34-16)
$$

Note that the induced electric field E depends on $dB/dt$ but not on B. For $r=5.2\ \text{cm}$ we have, for the magnitude of $\overrightarrow{E}$:
$$
\begin{aligned}
E&=\frac{1}{2}\left|\frac{d B}{d t}\right| r \\
&=\frac{1}{2}(0.13\ \text{T/s})\left(5.2 \times 10^{-2}\ \text{m}\right) \\
&=0.0034\ \text{V/m}=3.4\ \text{mV/m}
\end{aligned}
$$

(b) In this case we have $r>R$ so that the entire flux of the magnet passes through the circular path. Thus:
$$
\Phi_{B}=B\left(\pi R^{2}\right)
$$

From Faraday's law (Eq. 34-13) we then find:
$$
E(2 \pi r)=-\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}=-\left(\pi R^{2}\right) \frac{d B}{d t}
$$

Solving for E and again taking magnitudes, we find:
$$
E=\frac{1}{2}\left|\frac{d B}{d t}\right| \frac{R^{2}}{r} \quad(34-17)
$$

An electric field is induced in this case even at points that are well outside the (changing) magnetic field, an important result that makes transformers (see Section 37-5) possible. For $r=12.5\ \text{cm}$, Eq. 34-17 gives:
$$
\begin{aligned}
E&=\frac{1}{2}(0.13\ \text{T/s}) \frac{\left(8.5 \times 10^{-2}\ \text{m}\right)^{2}}{12.5 \times 10^{-2}\ \text{m}} \\
&=3.8 \times 10^{-3}\ \text{V/m}=3.8\ \text{mV/m}
\end{aligned}
$$

Equations 34-16 and 34-17 yield the same result, as they must, for $r=R$. Figure 34-17 shows a plot of $E(r)$ based on these two equations.

### The Betatron*
The betatron is a device for accelerating electrons (also known as beta particles) to high speeds using the induced electric field produced by a changing magnetic field. Typical electron energies are 50-100 MeV. Such high-energy electrons can be used for basic research in physics as well as for producing x rays for applied research in industry and for medical purposes such as cancer therapy.

Figure 34-18a shows a cross section through the inner structure of a betatron. The magnetic field, whose shape is determined by the pole pieces M made of magnetic material, can be varied by changing the current in the coils. The electrons circulate in the evacuated, doughnut-shaped tube.

The coils carry an alternating current and produce the magnetic field shown in Fig. 34-18a. For electrons to circulate in the direction shown (counterclockwise as viewed from above), the magnetic field must point upward (which we take as positive). The changing field must have $d B / d t>0$, so that $d \Phi_{B} / d t>0$ and the electrons are accelerated (rather than decelerated) during the cycle. Thus only the first quarter-cycle of Fig. 34-18b is useful for the operation of the betatron. Electrons enter the machine at $t=0$ and are extracted at $t=T / 4$. For the remaining three-quarters of the cycle, the betatron produces no beam. The betatron produces a pulsed, rather than a continuous beam, with pulses typically every 0.01 s.

*For a review of developments and applications of betatrons and similar devices, see “Ultra-high-current Electron Induction Accelerators,” by Chris A. Kapetanakos and Phillip Sprangle, Physics Today, February 1985, p. 38.

### SAMPLE PROBLEM 34-7
In a 100-MeV betatron, the orbit radius R is 84 cm. The magnetic field in the region enclosed by the orbit rises periodically (60 times per second) from zero to a maximum average value $B_{av, m}=0.80\ \text{T}$ in an accelerating interval of one-fourth of a period, or 4.2 ms. (a) How much energy does the electron gain in one average trip around its orbit in this changing flux? (b) What is the average speed of an electron during its acceleration cycle?

**Solution**  
(a) The central flux rises during the accelerating interval from zero to a maximum of:
$$
\begin{aligned}
\Phi_{B}&=\left(B_{av, m}\right)\left(\pi R^{2}\right) \\
&=(0.80\ \text{T})(\pi)(0.84\ \text{m})^{2}=1.8\ \text{Wb}
\end{aligned}
$$

The average value of $d \Phi_{B} / d t$ during the accelerating interval is then:
$$
\left(\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}\right)_{av}=\frac{\Delta \Phi_{B}}{\Delta t}=\frac{1.8\ \text{Wb}}{4.2 \times 10^{-3}\ \text{s}}=430\ \text{Wb/s}
$$

From Faraday’s law (Eq. 34-3) this is also the average emf in volts. Thus the electron increases its energy by an average of 430 eV per revolution in this changing flux. To achieve its full final energy of 100 MeV, it has to make about 230,000 revolutions in its orbit, a total path length of about 1200 km.

(b) The length of the acceleration cycle is given as 4.2 ms, and the path length is calculated above to be 1200 km. The average speed is then:
$$
v_{av}=\frac{1200 \times 10^{3}\ \text{m}}{4.2 \times 10^{-3}\ \text{s}}=2.86 \times 10^{8}\ \text{m/s}
$$

This is 95% of the speed of light. The actual speed of the fully accelerated electron, when it has reached its final energy of 100 MeV, is 99.9987% of the speed of light.

## 34-7 INDUCTION AND RELATIVE MOTION (Optional)
In Section 33-6, we discussed the idea that the classification of electromagnetic effects into purely electric or purely magnetic was dependent on the reference frame of the observer. For example, what appears to be a magnetic field in one frame of reference can appear as a mixture of electric and magnetic fields in another frame of reference. Since motional emf is determined by the velocity of the object moving through the magnetic field, it clearly depends on the reference frame of the observer. Other observers in different inertial frames will measure different velocities and different magnetic field strengths. It is therefore essential in calculating induced emfs and currents to specify the reference frame of the observer.

Figure 34-19a shows a closed loop, which an external agent (not shown) causes to move at velocity $\vec{v}$ with respect to a magnet that provides a uniform field $B$ over a region. An observer $S$ is at rest with respect to the magnet used to establish the field $\overrightarrow{B}$. The induced emf in this case is a motional emf because the conducting loop is moving with respect to this observer.

Consider a positive charge carrier in the left end of the loop. To observer $S$ this charge $q$ is constrained to move through the field $\overrightarrow{B}$ with velocity $\vec{v}$ to the right along with the loop, and it experiences a magnetic force given by $\overrightarrow{F}=q \vec{v} ×\overrightarrow{B}$ (not shown in Fig. 34-19). This force causes the carriers to move upward (in the $y$ direction) along the conductor; eventually, they acquire the drift velocity $\overrightarrow{v}_{d}$, as shown in Fig. 34-19a.

The resultant equilibrium velocity of the carriers is now $\vec{V}$, the vector sum of $\vec{v}$ and $\overrightarrow{v}_{d}$. In this situation the magnetic force $\overrightarrow{F}_{B}$ is 
$$\vec{F}_{B}=q \vec{V} × \vec{B}, \quad(34-18)$$
which is acting (as usual) at right angles to the resultant velocity $\vec{V}$ of the carrier, as shown in Fig. 34-19a.

Acting alone, $\overrightarrow{F}_{B}$ would tend to push the carriers through the left wall of the conductor. Because this does not happen, the conductor wall must exert a normal force $\vec{N}$ on the carriers (see Fig. 34-19a) of magnitude such that $\overrightarrow{v}_{d}$ lies parallel to the axis of the wire; in other words, $\vec{N}$ exactly cancels the horizontal component of $\overrightarrow{F}_{B}$, leaving only the component $F_{B}\cos\theta$ that lies along the direction of the conductor. This latter component of force on the carrier is also canceled out in this case by the average impulsive force $F_{i}$ associated with the internal collisions that the carrier experiences as it drifts with (constant) speed $v_{d}$ through the wire.

The kinetic energy of the charge carrier as it drifts through the wire remains constant. This is consistent with the fact that the resultant force acting on the charge carrier—$(=\overrightarrow{F}_{B}+\overrightarrow{F}_{i}+\overrightarrow{N})$—is zero. The work done by $\overrightarrow{F}_{B}$ is zero because magnetic forces, acting at right angles to the velocity of a moving charge, can do no work on that charge. Thus the (negative) work done on the carrier by the average internal collision force $\overrightarrow{F}_{i}$ must be exactly canceled by the (positive) work done on the carrier by the force $\vec{N}$. Ultimately, $\vec{N}$ is supplied by the agent that pulls the loop through the magnetic field, and the mechanical energy expended by this agent appears as internal energy in the loop, as we have seen in Section 34-4.

Let us then calculate the work $dW$ done on the carrier in time $dt$ by the force $\vec{N}$; it is 
$$dW = N(vdt), \quad(34-19)$$
in which $vdt$ is the distance that the loop (and the carrier) has moved to the right in Fig. 34-19a in time $dt$. We can write for $N$ (see Eq. 34-18 and Fig. 34-19a) 
$$N = F_{B}\sin\theta=(qVB)\left(v_{d}/V\right)=qBv_{d}. (34-20)$$

Substituting Eq. 34-20 into Eq. 34-19 yields 
$$\begin{aligned} dW &=\left(qBv_{d}\right)(vdt) \\ &=(qBv)\left(v_{d}dt\right)=qBvds, \quad(34-21) \end{aligned}$$
in which $ds(=v_{d}dt)$ is the distance the carrier drifts along the conductor in time $dt$.

The work done on the carrier as it makes a complete circuit of the loop is found by integrating Eq. 34-21 around the loop and is 
$$W=\oint dW = qBvD. \quad(34-22)$$

This follows because work contributions for the top and the bottom of the loop are opposite in sign and cancel, and no work is done in those portions of the loop that lie outside the magnetic field.

An agent that does work on charge carriers, thus establishing a current in a closed conducting loop, can be viewed as an emf. Using Eq. 34-22, we find 
$$\mathscr{E}=\frac{W}{q}=\frac{qBvD}{q}=B D v, \quad(34-23)$$
which is the same result that we derived from Faraday’s law of induction; see Eq. 34-6. Thus a motional emf is intimately connected with the sideways deflection of a charged particle moving through a magnetic field.

We now consider how the situation of Fig. 34-19a would appear to an observer $S'$ who is at rest with respect to the loop. To this observer, the magnet is moving to the left in Fig. 34-19 with velocity $-\overrightarrow{v}$, and the charge $q$ does not move in the $x'$ direction with the loop but drifts clockwise around the loop. $S'$ measures an emf $\mathscr{E}'$ that is accounted for, at the microscopic level, by postulating that an electric field $\overrightarrow{E}'$ is induced in the loop by the action of the moving magnet. The emf $\mathscr{E}'$ is related to $\overrightarrow{E}'$ by Eq.34-12, 
$$\mathscr{E}'=\oint \vec{E}' \cdot d \vec{s} . \quad(34-24)$$

The induced field $\overrightarrow{E}'$, which has the same origin as the induced fields that we discussed in Section 34-6, exerts a force $q \overrightarrow{E}'$ on the charge carrier.

The induced field $\overrightarrow{E}'$ that produces the current exists only in the left end of the loop. (As we carry out the integral of Eq. 34-12 around the loop, contributions to the integral from the $x'$ component of $\overrightarrow{E}'$ cancel on the top and bottom sides, whereas there is no contribution from parts of the loop that are not in the magnetic field.) Using Eq. 34-12 we then obtain 
$$\mathscr{E}'=E' D . \quad(34-25)$$

For motion at speeds that are small compared with the speed of light, the emfs given by Eqs. 34-23 and 34-25 must be identical, because the relative motion of the loop and the magnet is identical in the two cases shown in Fig. 34-19. Equating these relations yields 
$$ED = B D v,$$
or 
$$E'=v B . \quad(34-26)$$

In Fig. 34-19b the vector $\overrightarrow{E}'$ points upward along the axis of the left end of the conducting loop because this is the direction in which positive charges are observed to drift. The directions of $\vec{v}$ and $\overrightarrow{B}$ are clearly shown in this figure. We see then that Eq. 34-26 is consistent with the more general vector relation 
$$\vec{E}'=\vec{v} × \vec{B} . \quad(34-27)$$

We have not proved Eq. 34-27 except for the special case of Fig. 34-19; nevertheless it is true in general, no matter what the angle between $\vec{v}$ and $\overrightarrow{B}$.

We interpret Eq. 34-27 in the following way. Observer $S$ fixed with respect to the magnet is aware only of a magnetic field. To this observer, the force arises from the motion of the charges through $\overrightarrow{B}$. Observer $S'$ fixed on the charge carrier is aware of an electric field $\overrightarrow{E}'$ also and attributes the force on the charge (at rest initially with respect to $S'$) to the electric field. $S$ says the force is of purely magnetic origin, whereas $S'$ says the force is of purely electric origin. From the point of view of $S$, the induced emf is given by $\oint(\overrightarrow{v} ×\overrightarrow{B}) \cdot d \overrightarrow{s}$. From the point of view of $S'$, the same induced emf is given by $\oint \overrightarrow{E}' \cdot d \overrightarrow{s}$, where $\overrightarrow{E}'$ is the (induced) electric field vector that $S'$ observes at points along the circuit.

For a third observer $S''$ relative to whom both the magnet and the loop are moving, the force tending to move charges around the loop is neither purely electric nor purely magnetic, but a bit of each. In summary, in the equation 
$$\vec{F}/q=\vec{E}+\vec{v} × \vec{B},$$
different observers form different assessments of $\overrightarrow{E}$, $\overrightarrow{B}$, and $\vec{v}$ but, when these are combined, all observers form the same assessment of $F/q$ and all obtain the same value for the induced emf in the loop (which depends only on the relative motion). That is, the total force (and, hence, the total acceleration) is the same for all observers, but each observer forms a different estimate of the separate electric and magnetic forces contributing to the same total force.

The essential point is that what seems like a magnetic field to one observer may seem like a mixture of an electric field and a magnetic field to a second observer in a different inertial reference frame. Both observers agree, however, on the overall measurable result—in the case of Fig. 34-19, the current in the loop. We are forced to conclude that magnetic and electric fields are not independent of each other and have no separate unique existence; they depend on the inertial frame, as we also concluded in Section 33-6.

All the results of this section assume that the relative speed between $S$ and $S'$ is small compared with the speed of light $c$. If $v$ is comparable to $c$, the appropriate set of relativistic transformations must be applied. In this case, we would find that the induced emfs measured by $S$ and $S'$ would no longer be equal, and that the induced electric field is not given by Eq. 34-27. However, if we are careful to define all quantities in the proper relativistic manner, we find again that the basic laws of electromagnetism, including Faraday’s law, hold in all inertial reference frames. Indeed, such considerations led Einstein to the special theory of relativity; in the language of special relativity, we say that Maxwell's equations are invariant with respect to the Lorentz transformation.


## MULTIPLE CHOICE
34-1 Faraday’s Experiments
34-2 Faraday’s Law of Induction
1. A uniform magnetic $B$ perpendicular to a wire loop varies with time as shown in Fig. 34-20a. Which of the plots in Fig. 34-20b best represents the induced current in the loop as a function of time?
2. A flexible conducting loop is in the shape of a circle with a variable radius. The loop is in a uniform magnetic field perpendicular to the plane of the loop. To sustain a constant emf $\mathscr{E}$ in the loop, the radius $r$ must vary with time according to
   (A) $r(t) \propto \sqrt{t}$
   (B) $r(t) \propto t$
   (C) $r(t) \propto t^{2}$
   (D) $r$ should be constant.
3. A flexible wire loop in the shape of a circle has a radius that grows linearly with time. There is a magnetic field perpendicular to the plane of the loop that has a magnitude inversely proportional to the distance from the center of loop, $B(r) \propto 1/r$. How does the emf $\mathscr{E}$ vary with time?
   (A) $\mathscr{E} \propto t^{2}$
   (B) $\mathscr{E} \propto r$
   (C) $\mathscr{E} \propto \sqrt{t}$
   (D) $\mathscr{E}$ is constant.
4. The magnetic flux through a wire loop changes by $\Delta \Phi_{B}$ in a time $\Delta t$. The change in flux $\Delta \Phi_{B}$ is proportional to
   (A) the current in the wire.
   (B) the resistance of the wire.
   (C) the net charge that flows across any cross section in the wire.
   (D) the potential difference between any two fixed points in the wire.

34-3 Lenz’ Law
5. A bar magnet drops through a wire loop. Which graph in Fig. 34-21 best shows how the current through the loop varies with time? Assume that a negative current refers to a current flowing in the reverse direction.
6. The current through the coil on the right in Fig. 34-2 varies as shown in Fig. 34-22a. Which graph in Fig. 34-22b best shows the ammeter reading as a function of time?
7. The long, straight wire in Fig. 34-23 carries a constant current $i$ to the right. What is the direction of the induced current in the wire loop?
   (A) Clockwise
   (B) Counterclockwise
   (C) There is no induced current.
8. The long, straight wire in Fig. 34-23 carries a current $i$ to the right that increases with time. What is the direction of the induced current in the wire loop?
   (A) Clockwise 
   (B) Counterclockwise
   (C) There is no induced current.
9. The long, straight wire in Fig. 34-23 carries a current $i$ to the right that decreases linearly with time. At time $t_{r}$ the current is zero, and then begins to increase linearly in the other direction. What is the direction of the induced current in the wire loop?
   (A) Clockwise
   (B) Counterclockwise
   (C) The induced current starts off in one direction, but at time $t$ it stops and then begins flowing in the other direction.
   (D) There is no induced current.
10. The long, straight wire in Fig. 34-24 carries a current $i$ to the right that increases with time. What is the direction of the induced current in the circular wire loop, which lies in a plane perpendicular to the wire?
    (A) Clockwise as viewed from the right
    (B) Counterclockwise as viewed from the right
    (C) There is no induced current.

34-4 Motional EMF
11. Consider again the straight wire and loop of Fig. 34-23. The straight wire carries a constant current $i$ to the right.
    (a) The loop is pulled directly up by an external force. What is the direction (if any) of the induced current in the loop?
    (A) Clockwise 
    (B) Counterclockwise
    (C) There is no induced current.
    (b) While the loop is being pulled upward by the external force, what (if any) is the direction of the magnetic force on the loop?
    (A) Up
    (B) Down
    (C) Left
    (D) There is no magnetic force.
    (c) If the external force instead pulls the loop to the left, parallel to the wire, what is the direction (if any) of the induced current in the loop?
    (A) Clockwise
    (B) Counterclockwise
    (C) There is no induced current.

34-5 Generators and Motors
12. A person uses a hand-cranked generator to light a constant-resistance bulb. As the person's rate of cranking slows down, which of the following quantities decreases?
    (A) Emf
    (B) Current
    (C) Frequency
    (D) Two of the above
    (E) All of the above
13. Consider a bicycle generator attached to a wheel and connected to a constant-resistance light. If the speed of pedaling doubles, the power output from the light will
    (A) remain the same.
    (B) double.
    (C) increase by a factor of four.
    (D) increase by a factor of eight.
14. Does an electric motor have a higher effective resistance when it is stopped or when it is spinning?
    (A) When spinning
    (B) When stopped
    (C) The effective resistance is the same in both cases.
15. All other things being equal, are you more likely to “burn out” the starter motor on your automobile if the battery is overcharged or undercharged?
    (A) If the battery is overcharged
    (B) If the battery is undercharged
    (C) The charge of the battery makes no difference here.

34-6 Induced Electric Fields
16. The magnetic field in a region of space is given by $\overrightarrow{B}=(0.001 ~T / s^{2}) t^{2} \hat{i}$ for $-2 ~s ≤t ≤2 ~s$. What is the direction of the induced electric field when $t=0 ~s$?
    (A) Parallel to the $x$ axis
    (B) Parallel to the $y$ axis
    (C) The electric field is in circles centered on the $x$ axis.
    (D) There is no induced electric field when $t=0 ~s$.
17. The current through an infinitely long solenoid is increased linearly as a function of time.
    (a) The electric field inside the solenoid is
    (A) in the form of circles centered on the axis of the solenoid.
    (B) parallel to the axis of the solenoid.
    (C) radially directed outward from the axis of the cylinder.
    (D) zero.
    (b) The magnitude of the electric field outside the solenoid is
    (A) uniform and nonzero.
    (B) radially symmetric, falling off with distance from the solenoid.
    (C) radially symmetric, increasing with the distance from the solenoid.
    (D) zero.
18. A long, straight wire carries a current that decreases linearly with time. What is the direction of the induced electric field outside the wire?
    (A) Parallel to the current
    (B) Opposite to the current
    (C) Pointing radially outward from the wire
    (D) Pointing radially inward toward the wire
    (E) There is no induced electric field outside the wire.

# 第34章 法拉第电磁感应定律

我们常常可以通过考虑一个实验如何通过对称性与其他实验相关联，来预测该实验的结果。例如，一个处于磁场中的电流环会受到一个（由磁场产生的）扭矩，使环路旋转。考虑一个类似的情况：一个没有电流的导线环被置于磁场中，一个外部作用施加的扭矩使环路旋转。我们发现环路中出现了电流！对于磁场中的导线环，电流会产生扭矩，而扭矩也会产生电流。这是自然界对称性的一个例子。

我们可以基于法拉第电磁感应定律来理解和分析环路中电流的出现，这也是本章的主题。法拉第定律是四个麦克斯韦方程之一，可以通过许多在实验室中容易完成的简单实验直接证明。

## 34-1 法拉第的实验

法拉第电磁感应定律是由迈克尔·法拉第于1831年在英国以及大约同时期由约瑟夫·亨利在美国通过实验发现的。* 尽管法拉第首先发表了他的结果，这使他拥有了发现的优先权，但电感（见第36章）的国际单位制单位被命名为亨利（缩写H）。另一方面，正如我们所见，电容的国际单位制单位被称为法拉（缩写F）。在第36章讨论电容-电感电路中的振荡时，我们会看到将这两位才华横溢的同时代人的名字在同一个背景下联系起来是多么恰当。

图34-1显示了一个作为包含电流表电路一部分的导线线圈。通常，我们预计电流表不会显示电路中有电流，因为似乎没有电动势。然而，如果我们推动一个条形磁铁使其北极朝向线圈，会发生一件引人注目的事情。当磁铁移动时，电流表发生偏转，表明线圈中产生了电流。如果我们使磁铁相对于线圈保持静止，电流表不会偏转。如果我们使磁铁远离线圈，电流表再次偏转，但方向相反，这意味着线圈中的电流方向相反。如果我们使用磁铁的南极而不是北极，实验现象如前所述，但偏转方向相反。磁铁移动得越快，电流表的读数就越大。进一步的实验表明，重要的是磁铁和线圈的相对运动。无论我们是移动磁铁靠近线圈还是移动线圈靠近磁铁，都没有区别。

*除了各自独立且同时发现电磁感应定律外，法拉第和亨利的生活中还有其他一些相似之处。两人都在早年当过学徒。法拉第14岁时在伦敦给一个图书装订商当学徒。亨利13岁时在纽约奥尔巴尼给一个钟表匠当学徒。晚年，法拉第被任命为伦敦皇家研究所的所长，该所的成立很大程度上归功于一位美国人本杰明·汤普森（拉姆福德伯爵）。而亨利则成为华盛顿特区史密森尼学会的秘书，该学会是由一位英国人詹姆斯·史密森的遗赠资助成立的。

这个实验中出现的电流称为感应电流，据说是由感应电动势产生的。注意，电路中没有任何电池。通过像这样的实验，法拉第能够推导出给出感应电动势大小和方向的定律。这种电动势在实践中非常重要。您阅读本书的房间里的灯很可能就是由商用发电机产生的感应电动势来供电的。

在另一个实验中，使用了图34-2的装置。线圈彼此靠近放置但相对静止。当我们闭合开关S，从而在右侧线圈中建立起稳定电流时，左侧线圈中的电流表会瞬间偏转。当我们打开开关，从而中断该电流时，电流表再次瞬间偏转，但方向相反。在这个实验中，没有任何装置发生物理运动。

实验表明，每当右侧线圈中的电流发生变化时，图34-2中的左侧线圈中就会产生感应电动势。重要的是电流变化的速率，而不是电流的大小。

这两个实验的共同特征是运动或变化。正是移动的磁铁或变化的电流导致了感应电动势的产生。在下一节中，我们将给出这些效应的数学基础。

## 34-2 法拉第电磁感应定律

想象一下，有磁感线从图34-1中的条形磁铁以及图34-2中右侧的电流环发出。其中一些磁感线穿过两个图中的左侧线圈。当图34-1中的磁铁移动时，或者图34-2中的开关打开或闭合时，穿过左侧线圈的磁感线数量发生变化。正如法拉第的实验所表明的，以及法拉第的磁感线技术帮助我们可视化的那样，正是穿过电路环路的磁感线数量的变化在环路中感应出电动势。具体来说，是穿过环路的磁感线数量的变化率决定了感应电动势的大小。

为了使这个陈述量化，我们引入磁通量 $\Phi_{B}$。类似于电通量（见第27-3节），磁通量可以被认为是穿过一个表面的磁感线数量的度量。类比于电通量（见公式27-7），通过任何表面的磁通量定义为：
$$
\Phi_{B}=\int \vec{B} \cdot d \vec{A} \quad(34-1)
$$
这里 $d \overrightarrow{A}$ 是表面的一个面积元（如图34-3所示），积分在我们希望计算通量的整个表面上进行（例如，图34-1中环路所包围的表面）。如果磁场在平面面积A上具有恒定的大小和方向，则通量可以写为：
$$
\Phi_{B}=B A \cos \theta \quad(34-2)
$$
其中 $\theta$ 是表面法线与磁场方向之间的夹角。

磁通量的国际单位制单位是特斯拉·米²，被命名为韦伯（缩写Wb）；即：
$$
1 \text{ 韦伯} = 1 \text{ 特斯拉} \cdot \text{米}^2
$$
反过来看这个关系，我们看到特斯拉等价于韦伯/米²，这是在特斯拉被采纳为国际单位制单位之前用于磁场的单位。

根据磁通量，电路中感应出的电动势由法拉第电磁感应定律给出：
电路中感应电动势的大小等于通过电路的磁通量随时间的变化率。

用数学术语表示，法拉第定律是：
$$
|\mathscr{E}|=\left|\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}\right| \quad(34-3)
$$
其中 $\mathscr{E}$ 是感应电动势。如果通量变化率的单位是韦伯每秒，则电动势的单位是伏特。我们将在下一节考虑电动势的方向（或符号）。

如果线圈由N匝组成，那么每一匝都会出现感应电动势，电路中的总感应电动势是各个值的总和，就像电池串联的情况一样。如果线圈缠绕得非常紧密，以至于每一匝都可以被认为占据相同的空间区域，因此经历相同的通量变化，那么总感应电动势为：
$$
|\mathscr{E}|=N\left|\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}\right| \quad(34-4)
$$

有很多方法可以改变通过环路的磁通量：相对于环路移动磁铁（如图34-1），改变附近电路中的电流（如图34-2，也如在变压器中），在非均匀场中移动环路，在固定磁场中旋转环路使得角度 $\theta$（公式34-2）发生变化（如在发电机中，我们将在第34-5节讨论），或者改变环路的大小或形状。在每种方法中，都会在环路中感应出电动势。

最后，我们注意到，尽管公式34-3被称为法拉第定律，但它并不是由法拉第以这种形式写出的，法拉第没有受过数学训练。事实上，法拉第关于电磁学的三卷本已出版著作——物理学和化学发展史上的一个里程碑式成就——不包含一个方程！

### 示例问题 34-1

图34-4中的长螺线管S每厘米有220匝；其直径d为3.2厘米。在其中心，我们放置一个紧密缠绕的130匝线圈C，直径 $d_{C}=2.1\ \text{cm}$。螺线管中的电流在0.16秒的时间内以稳定速率从零增加到1.5 A。在螺线管电流变化期间，中心线圈中出现的感应电动势的绝对值（即，不考虑符号的大小）是多少？

**解**
在这种情况下，通过线圈C的磁通量发生变化是因为螺线管内部的磁场B随着电流的变化而变化。磁场是均匀的并且垂直于线圈C每一匝的面积，所以 $\Phi_{B}=\int \overrightarrow{B} \cdot d \overrightarrow{A}=B A$，其中A是内部线圈每一匝的面积。法拉第定律给出：
$$
|\mathscr{E}|=N\left|\frac{\Delta \Phi_{B}}{\Delta t}\right|=N\left|\frac{A \Delta B}{\Delta t}\right|=N A\left|\frac{\mu_{0} n \Delta i}{\Delta t}\right|=N A \mu_{0} n\left|\frac{\Delta i}{\Delta t}\right|
$$
其中我们使用了理想螺线管磁场公式 $B=\mu_{0} n i$（公式33-28）。中心线圈的面积A为 $\frac{1}{4} \pi d_{C}^{2}=3.46 \times 10^{-4}\ \text{m}^2$。电流在0.16秒内变化了1.5 A。则电动势为：
$$
\begin{aligned}
|\mathscr{E}|&= (130)\left(3.46 \times 10^{-4}\ \text{m}^2\right)\left(4 \pi \times 10^{-7}\ \text{T} \cdot \text{m/A}\right) \\
&\quad \times\left(2.2 \times 10^{4}\ \text{turns/m}\right) \frac{1.5\ \text{A}}{0.16\ \text{s}} \\
&= 1.2 \times 10^{-2}\ \text{V}=12\ \text{mV}
\end{aligned}
$$

我们将在下一节解释如何找到感应电动势的方向。我们可以通过以下论证预览该讨论。假设外部线圈磁通的增加导致内部线圈中产生一个电流，该电流产生的磁场方向与原磁场方向相同。这反过来会增加外部线圈所包围区域的磁通量，这同样应导致其电流增加，从而再次增加内部线圈的电流，依此类推。这是一个合理的结果吗？

## 34-3 楞次定律

到目前为止，我们还没有指定感应电动势的方向。本章后面我们将讨论感应电动势与感应电场之间的关系，这使我们能够写出不带绝对值符号的法拉第定律。现在，我们根据感应电动势将产生的（感应）电流来确定其方向，使用的是海因里希·楞次（1804-1865）在1834年提出的一条规则，称为楞次定律：
感应电流所产生的磁场的磁通量，会反抗引起该感应电流的磁通量变化。

楞次定律涉及感应电流，这意味着它仅适用于闭合的导电电路。如果电路是开路的，我们通常可以考虑如果它闭合会发生什么，并通过这种方式找到感应电动势的方向。

如果"磁通量变化"是增加，那么楞次定律要求感应电流的方向反抗这种增加；也就是说，感应电流的磁场产生的磁通量将以与正在增加的原磁通量相反的方向穿过环路。如果"磁通量变化"是减少，感应电流的磁场产生的磁通量就反抗这种减少；也就是说，它倾向于增加原磁通量以防止其减少。

作为应用楞次定律的一个例子，让我们考虑图34-1中法拉第的第一个实验。当磁铁的北极向环路移动时，通过环路的磁通量增加。这种磁通量的增加就是楞次定律所指的"变化"。环路中的电流必须反抗这种变化；也就是说，电流必须建立一个在环路内部指向相反方向的磁场。图34-5显示了感应电流的方向。使用右手定则，你可以看到感应电流建立的磁场在环路内部的方向与磁铁的磁场方向相反。

另一方面，如果我们使磁铁远离环路，磁通量就会减少，感应电流必须反抗这种减少。因此，感应电流产生的磁场必须在环路内部与磁铁的磁场方向相同，所以电流将与图34-5所示的方向相反。

解释楞次定律的另一种方式是基于能量守恒原理。当磁铁向环路移动时，环路中感应电流产生的磁场施加一个力反抗磁铁的运动，如图34-6所示。环路建立一个类似于磁铁的磁场，其北极朝向接近中的磁铁的北极，两个北极相互排斥。也就是说，我们必须施加更大的力才能继续将磁铁推向环路。假设环路中的电流方向相反，以至于它建立一个方向相反的感应场。磁铁不会被感应电流的场排斥，反而会被这个场吸引并加速朝向环路。随着磁铁加速，环路中的电流会增加，导致对磁铁的力增加，加速度也随之增加。磁铁的动能和环路中焦耳热（$i^{2} R$）能量耗散的速率都会增加。由于磁铁向环路的一个小的初始推力，我们会得到能量的大量增加——这明显违反了能量守恒定律。这不可能发生，因此我们得出结论，感应电流产生的场必须反抗磁铁向环路的运动。类似地，如果我们使磁铁远离环路，感应场将反抗这种运动，并将磁铁拉向环路。

在任一情况下，重要的不是感应场反抗磁铁的场，而是它反抗变化，即通过环路的磁通量的增加或减少。如果在图34-5中，磁铁的场指向左侧并且正在增加（当磁铁向环路移动时），感应场必须在环路内部指向右侧。如果磁铁的场指向左侧并且正在减少（当磁铁远离环路移动时），感应场必须在环路内部指向左侧。如果磁铁调转方向，使南极移向环路，磁场将指向右侧并增加，因此感应场将在环路内部指向左侧。

我们现在可以得出示例问题34-1中小线圈C中电流的方向。在图34-4中，螺线管S的磁场指向右侧并且正在增加。C中的感应电流必须反抗通过C的磁通量的这种增加，因此必须建立一个反抗S的磁场的场。因此，C中的电流方向与S中的电流方向相反。如果S中的电流是减少而不是增加，类似的论证表明C中的感应电流方向将与S中的电流方向相同。

### 法拉第定律中的符号

到目前为止，我们只用法拉第定律的大小形式。导电环路中感应电流的方向和大小可以使用楞次定律和仅含大小的法拉第定律版本来确定。

我们现在希望从法拉第定律（公式34-3）中移除绝对值符号。在我们这样做之前，我们必须澄清方程两边存在的符号模糊性。如果我们想写 $\mathscr{E}$ 而不是 $|\mathscr{E}|$，我们必须指定感应电动势的符号或方向是什么意思。考虑图34-7a所示的简单单环路电路，它可能包含几个电池和电阻器。要分析这个电路，我们可以使用回路定律。应该清楚的是，如果我们顺时针绕行，将所有电动势相加，并找到一个净正值，那么电流也将是顺时针的。（只有这样，电阻器上的总电位差才能为负，以满足回路定理。）对于真实电路，正电流的方向与我们绕行环路会得到净正电动势的方向相同。我们可以对感应电流和电动势建立相同的联系：感应电流的方向就是我们绕行环路以获得正电动势的方向。

公式34-3右边的符号也给我们带来了困难。当我们讨论涉及通过闭合曲面的通量的高斯定律时，我们定义了 $d \overrightarrow{A}$ 的方向为通过闭合曲面的外法线方向。然而，我们应用法拉第定律的电流环路所包围的表面是开放表面，因此看起来我们可以选择 $d \overrightarrow{A}$ 为垂直于表面的任一方向（例如图34-5中环路所包围的表面）。解决这个困境的方法是另一个右手定则：将右手指向您将用来计算电动势的绕行环路的方向。（对于实际的导线电流环，这与感应电流的方向相同。）然后您的拇指将指向我们在计算磁通量时取 $d \overrightarrow{A}$ 的方向（图34-7b）。

有了这些关于电动势方向或指向的定义以及用于求磁通量的 $d \overrightarrow{A}$ 方向的定义，我们可以将法拉第定律写为：
$$
\mathscr{E}=-\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t} \quad(34-5)
$$
这个方程中的负号实际上是楞次定律的表达，因此感应电动势反抗磁通量的变化。

图34-7c显示了如何使用公式34-5。假设 $\overrightarrow{B}$ 向下穿过环路并且大小正在增加。让我们选择向上的方向作为 $d \overrightarrow{A}$。（只要我们使用右手定则，我们选择哪个方向并不重要——重要的是 $\mathscr{E}$ 和 $d\overrightarrow{A}$ 之间的关系。）对于这个选择，$\overrightarrow{B} \cdot d \overrightarrow{A}$ 在表面的每一点都是负的，所以磁通量是负的。如果 $\overrightarrow{B}$ 的大小正在增加，那么 $\Phi_{B}$ 是负的并且大小在增加，所以 $d \Phi_{B} / d t<0$。公式34-5然后告诉我们 $\mathscr{E}$ 相对于我们选择的 $d \overrightarrow{A}$ 方向是正的。右手定则显示，电动势（以及因此的感应电流）必须如图34-7c所示。从上方看，感应电流将是逆时针的，正如我们直接应用楞次定律会得出的结论一样。

### 示例问题 34-2

一个半径为 $r=0.32\ \text{m}$、电阻为 $R=2.5\ \Omega$ 的圆形导线环，被放置在一个均匀磁场中，该磁场垂直于环路平面并初始方向指向页面内部，如图34-8所示。磁场随时间变化为 $B_{z}=-4.0\ \text{T}-(5.6\ \text{T/s}) t+(2.2\ \text{T/s}^2) t^2$，其中正z轴向上指向页面外。求在 $t=1\ \text{s}$ 和 $t=2\ \text{s}$ 时，环路中电流的大小和方向。

**解**
让我们选择 $d \overrightarrow{A}$ 方向进入页面。在 $t=1\ \text{s}$ 时，$B_{z}=-7.4\ \text{T}$，在 $t=2\ \text{s}$ 时，$B_{z}=-6.4\ \text{T}$。因此，对于这个问题所覆盖的时间间隔，$\overrightarrow{B}$ 和 $d \overrightarrow{A}$ 是平行的，且 $\Phi_{B}>0$。因为磁场在环路上是均匀的，$\Phi_{B}=\overrightarrow{B} \cdot \overrightarrow{A}=B_{z} A_{z}$（这是一个正量，因为 $A_{z}<0$）。法拉第定律然后给出：
$$
\mathscr{E}=-\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}=-\frac{d\left(B_{z} A_{z}\right)}{d t}=-A_{z} \frac{d B_{z}}{d t}
$$

电动势的方向取决于 $d B_{z} / d t=-5.6 + 4.4t$ 的符号。在 $t=1\ \text{s}$ 时，$d B_{z} / d t=-1.2\ \text{T/s}$。由 $A=\pi r^{2}=0.322\ \text{m}^2$，我们有 $\mathscr{E}=-(-0.322\ \text{m}^2)(-1.2\ \text{T/m})=-0.39\ \text{V}$。负号意味着，当右手拇指指向 $\vec{A}$ 的方向（进入页面）时，电动势（以及因此的电流）的方向是逆时针的。电流的大小为 $i=|\mathscr{E}| / R=0.15\ \text{A}$。您应该检查从楞次定律是否得到相同的电流方向（逆时针）。

对 $t=2\ \text{s}$ 重复计算，我们找到 $d B_{z} / d t=+3.2\ \text{T/s}$ 和 $\mathscr{E}=+1.03\ \text{V}$。这给出一个大小为 $i=|\mathscr{E}| / R=0.37\ \text{A}$ 的顺时针电流。

注意，电流的方向在 $t=1\ \text{s}$ 和 $t=2\ \text{s}$ 之间发生了变化，即使磁场的方向保持不变（进入页面）。决定感应电流方向的是磁场变化的方向，而不是磁场本身的方向。

## 34-4 动生电动势

图34-9显示一个宽度为D的矩形导线环，其一端处于均匀恒定的磁场 $\overrightarrow{B}$ 中，该磁场垂直于环路平面。磁场 $\overrightarrow{B}$ 可以例如由一个大电磁铁的间隙产生。虚线表示假定的磁场边界。环路以恒定速度v被向右拉动。

图34-9所描述的情况与图34-5的情况在任何基本细节上都没有区别。在每种情况下，一个导电环路和一个磁铁都在做相对运动；在每种情况下，磁铁的磁场通过环路的磁通量都随时间变化。两种安排之间的重要区别是，图34-9的情况允许更容易的计算。

外部作用者（图34-9中的手）以恒定速度向右拉动环路。当环路移动时，环路在磁场中的那部分面积减小，因此磁通量减少。这种减少的磁通量感应出电动势，并且感应电流在环路中流动。这种由于导体和磁场源之间的相对运动而产生的电动势，有时被称为动生电动势。

图34-9中环路所包围的磁通量 $\Phi_{B}$ 为：
$$
\Phi_{B}=B A=B D x
$$
其中 $D x$ 是环路中B不为零的那部分面积。我们根据法拉第定律求电动势 $\mathscr{E}$：
$$
|\mathscr{E}|=\left|\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}\right|=\frac{d}{d t}(B D x)=B D \frac{d x}{d t}=B D v \quad(34-6)
$$
其中我们将 $dx/dt$ 设为环路被拉出磁场的速度v。注意，进入公式34-6的环路的唯一尺寸是左端导体的长度D。正如我们将在第34-7节中看到的，图34-9中的感应电动势可以被认为是局域在环路的左端。

电动势 $BDv$ 在环路中建立起电流，由下式给出：
$$
i=\frac{|\mathscr{E}|}{R}=\frac{B D v}{R} \quad(34-7)
$$
其中R是环路电阻。根据楞次定律，这个电流在图34-9中必须是顺时针的；它通过建立一个在环路内部与外部磁场平行的场来反抗"变化"（即 $\Phi_{B}$ 的减少）。

环路的各边，我们视其为载流导体，受到磁力 $\overrightarrow{F}_{B}=i \overrightarrow{L} \times \overrightarrow{B}$（见公式32-26）的作用，如图34-9所示。因为 $\overrightarrow{F}_{2}$ 和 $\overrightarrow{F}_{3}$ 大小相等方向相反，它们的效果相互抵消。作用在环路上的净磁力由 $\overrightarrow{F}_{1}$ 给出，为了以恒定速度移动环路，外部作用者必须施加一个与 $\overrightarrow{F}_{1}$ 大小相等方向相反的力。让我们计算外部作用者必须消耗的机械功率 $P=F v$，或者等效地，外部作用者对环路做功的速率。

力 $\overrightarrow{F}_{1}$ 的大小是 $F_{1}=i D B$，因为电流的方向总是垂直于 $\overrightarrow{B}$。由于外部作用者必须施加一个等于 $F_{1}$ 的力，该作用者消耗的功率为：
$$
P=F_{1} v=i D B v=\frac{B^{2} D^{2} v^{2}}{R} \quad(34-8)
$$
其中我们使用了公式34-7来表示感应电流 $i$。

我们也可以计算由于感应电流的焦耳热而在环路中耗散能量的速率。这由下式给出：
$$
P=i^{2} R=\left(\frac{B D v}{R}\right)^{2} R=\frac{B^{2} D^{2} v^{2}}{R} \quad(34-9)
$$
这与公式34-8中对环路所做的机械功的速率完全一致。外部作用者所做的功最终作为环路的焦耳热耗散掉。

### 涡电流

当通过一大块导电材料的磁通量发生变化时，材料中会出现感应电流（图34-10）。这些电流称为涡电流。在某些情况下，涡电流可能会产生不良影响。例如，它们会增加内能，从而可能升高材料的温度。因此，承受变化磁场的材料通常是层压的或由许多彼此绝缘的小层构成。涡电流不是遵循一个大环路，而是遵循许多较小的环路，从而增加了它们路径的总长度和相应的电阻：电阻热 $\mathscr{E}^{2} / R$ 变小，内能的增加也变小。另一方面，涡流加热也可以被有利地利用，例如在感应炉中，可以使用快速变化的磁场来加热材料样品。感应炉用于无法与待加热材料进行热接触的情况，例如当材料被封闭在真空室中时。

涡电流是真实的电流，并产生与真实电流相同的效应。特别是，一个力 $\overrightarrow{F}_{B}=i \overrightarrow{L} \times \overrightarrow{B}$ 作用在图34-10中穿过磁场的涡流路径部分。这个力被传递给材料，并且可以使用楞次定律证明（见问题25）该力反抗导体的运动。这产生了一种磁制动形式，其中施加到旋转轮或移动轨道上的磁场产生使运动减速的力。这种制动器没有活动部件或机械联动装置，并且不受普通机械制动器的摩擦磨损影响。此外，它在高速时效率最高（因为磁力随相对速度增加），而机械制动器在高速时磨损最大。

### 示例问题 34-3

图34-11a显示一个电阻为R、宽度为D、长度为a的矩形环路，正以恒定速度v被拉过一个厚度为d的区域，在该区域中由磁铁建立了一个均匀磁场 $\overrightarrow{B}$。作为环路右边缘位置x的函数，绘制 (a) 通过环路的磁通量 $\Phi_{B}$，(b) 感应电流 $i$，和 (c) 环路内部能量产生的速率P。使用 $D=4\ \text{cm}$，$a=10\ \text{cm}$，$d=15\ \text{cm}$，$R=16\ \Omega$，$B=2.0\ \text{T}$ 和 $v=1.0\ \text{m/s}$。

**解**
(a) 当环路不在磁场中时，磁通量 $\Phi_{B}$ 为零；当环路完全在磁场中时，它是 $BDa$；当环路进入磁场时，它是 $BDx$，当环路离开磁场时，它是 $B D[a-(x-d)]$。这些结论，您应该验证，以图形方式显示在图34-11b中。

(b) 感应电动势 $\mathscr{E}$ 的大小由 $\mathscr{E}=\left|d \Phi_{B} / d t\right|$ 给出，我们可以将其写为：
$$
\mathscr{E}=\left|\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}\right|=\left|\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d x} \frac{d x}{d t}\right|=\left|\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d x} v\right|
$$
其中 $d \Phi_{B} / d x$ 是图34-11b曲线的斜率。电流 $i$ 作为x的函数绘制在图34-11c中。使用与图34-8类似的推理，我们从楞次定律推断，当环路进入磁场时，从上方看电流是逆时针的。注意，当环路完全在磁场中时没有电流，因为通过环路的磁通量 $\Phi_{B}$ 不随时间变化，如图34-11b所示。

(c) 内部能量产生的速率由 $P=i^{2} R$ 给出。可以通过将图34-11c曲线的纵坐标平方并乘以R来计算。结果绘制在图34-11d中。

如果考虑磁场的边缘效应（这在实践中无法避免，见第33章问题11），图34-11中的尖锐弯折和角将被平滑曲线取代。

### 示例问题 34-4

一根长度为R的铜棒在均匀磁场 $\overrightarrow{B}$ 中以角频率 $\omega$ 旋转，如图34-12所示。求在棒的两端之间产生的电动势 $\mathscr{E}$。（我们可以通过沿着图中的虚线圆放置一个导电滑轨，并在滑轨和O点之间连接一个电压表来测量这个电动势。）

**解**
如果一段长度为 $d r$ 的导线以速度 $\vec{v}$ 垂直于磁场 $\overrightarrow{B}$ 运动，将产生一个动生电动势 $d\mathscr{E}$（见公式34-6），由下式给出：
$$
d\mathscr{E}=B v d r
$$

图34-12中的棒可以被划分为长度为 $d r$ 的元段，每个元段的线速度v为 $\omega r$。每个元段都垂直于 $\overrightarrow{B}$，并且也沿着垂直于B的方向运动，因此，由于每个元段的电动势 $d\mathscr{E}$ 是"串联的"，
$$
\mathscr{E}=\int d \mathscr{E}=\int_{0}^{R} B v d r=\int_{0}^{R} B \omega r d r=\frac{1}{2} B \omega R^{2}
$$

第二种方法，考虑在任何瞬间，图34-12中扇形 $aOb$ 所包围的磁通量由下式给出：
$$
\Phi_{B}=B A=B\left(\frac{1}{2} R^{2} \theta\right)
$$
其中 $\frac{1}{2} R^{2} \theta$ 是扇形的面积。求导得：
$$
\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}=\frac{1}{2} B R^{2} \frac{d \theta}{d t}=\frac{1}{2} B \omega R^{2}
$$

根据法拉第定律，这恰好是 $\mathscr{E}$ 的大小，并与前一个结果一致。

## 34-5 发电机和电动机

作为法拉第定律实际后果的例子，我们考虑简单发电机和电动机的操作。

图34-13显示了发电机的基本元件。一个导电导线环路在外部磁场中以恒定角速度 $\omega$ 旋转。（需要另一个图中未显示的装置来使环路旋转。在发电厂中，这个附加装置可能是从水坝落下的水或在锅炉中产生的蒸汽，它们驱动涡轮机的叶片旋转。）为简单起见，我们假设磁场在环路旋转的区域中是均匀的。

通过环路的磁通量由公式34-2给出：$\Phi_{B}=B A \cos \theta$。当环路旋转时，磁场方向与环路内面积元 $d \overrightarrow{A}$ 方向之间的夹角 $\theta$ 根据 $\theta=\omega t$ 随时间变化。在旋转环路中感应出的电动势为：
$$
\mathscr{E}=-\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}=-B A \frac{d}{d t}(\cos \omega t)=B A \omega \sin \omega t \quad(34-10)
$$

如果环路有N匝，总磁通量乘以N，因此电动势将为 $\mathscr{E}=N B A \omega \sin \omega t$。

感应电动势随时间正弦变化，如图34-14所示。如果发电机连接到电阻为R的外部负载，则电路中会出现感应电流 $i=\mathscr{E} / R$；该电流流过旋转环路和连接到负载的导线。

图34-14表明电流随着环路旋转而改变方向。改变方向的电流称为交流电（缩写AC）。该发电机产生的电动势称为交流电动势或交流电压。

现在让我们考虑环路中感应电流的方向。当环路处于图34-13所示的位置时，沿 $\omega$ 方向的一个小旋转会减少磁通量，因此（根据楞次定律）环路中的感应电流必须产生一个与外部场方向相同的场（从而反抗磁通量的减少）。因此，感应电流是逆时针的，如图所示。当环路平面变得与磁场平行时（$\theta=90^{\circ}$），磁通量变化最快，逆时针电流达到其最大幅度。从 $\theta=90^{\circ}$ 到 $\theta=180^{\circ}$，磁通量变得越来越负，因此电流必须继续沿逆时针方向以反抗磁通量的变化。最终，环路旋转通过 $\theta=180^{\circ}$，负磁通量开始向零增加。感应电流现在必须是顺时针方向，在环路内部产生一个向下的场以反抗磁通量的变化。继续这个推理，我们得出结论，每当环路旋转180°时，电流改变方向。

比这里显示的更复杂设计的发电机用于发电厂，以产生我们家中使用的交流电压。一种类似的称为交流发电机的装置用于汽车；在交流发电机中，磁场源（一个小永磁体）旋转，而产生感应电流的环路保持固定。

到目前为止，似乎我们可以从发电机获得"免费"电力。如果我们能设计一个带有无摩擦轴承的旋转环路，一旦我们以给定的角速度使其旋转，感应电流应该在外部负载中无限期地持续下去。将在外部负载中完成无限的工作，而无需投入任何能量。这种推理肯定有问题，它违反了能量守恒定律！

即使没有摩擦，也存在一个抑制环路旋转的扭矩。当电流在环路中流动时，存在一个由公式32-34给出的磁扭矩（$\tau=N i A B \sin \theta$）。无论电流是由电池产生还是由在磁场中运动产生，都无关紧要；电流环路上仍然存在扭矩。在图34-13所示的情况下，扭矩作用是将环路平面推向 $\theta=0$，因此它反抗旋转。事实上，您应该使自己相信，即使当环路通过 $\theta=180^{\circ}$ 且电流改变方向时，扭矩仍保持相同方向。为了反抗这个扭矩，产生环路旋转的装置必须在环路旋转时持续做功。因此，发电机可以被视为一种将机械功（环路的旋转）转换为负载中电功的装置。发电机产生的电能最终来源于使环路保持旋转的作用者提供的能量。

电动机简单来说就是反向运行的发电机。我们断开驱动环路旋转的外部源，并将图34-13中的负载替换为另一个发电机，该发电机产生交流电动势 $\mathscr{E}$，驱动环路中的电流 $i=\mathscr{E} / R$。在这种情况下，环路上再次存在磁扭矩使其旋转。就在环路通过扭矩为零的 $\theta=180^{\circ}$ 时，外部提供的电流改变方向，这使扭矩在环路继续旋转时保持相同方向。即使电流每半个周期改变一次方向，磁扭矩仍保持相同方向。

再次，如果我们假设无摩擦轴承，似乎我们应该能从电动机不劳而获。如果我们使导线的电阻非常小，那么电流和由此产生的扭矩变得非常大。似乎只需投入少量电能就能获得无限量的机械功。我们忽略的是，旋转环路会产生一个感应电动势 $\mathscr{E}_{ind}$（在电动机的情况下称为"反电动势"），由公式34-10给出。根据楞次定律，反电动势反抗所施加电动势 $\mathscr{E}$ 的效果。当电动机首次启动时，$\omega$ 很小，反电动势很小，电流为 $i=\mathscr{E} / R$。随着旋转速度加快，反电动势增加，电流减小到 $i=(\mathscr{E}-\mathscr{E}_{ind}) / R$。随着旋转速度继续增加，反电动势增加；当最终 $\mathscr{E}_{ind}=\mathscr{E}$ 时，没有电流流动，旋转的电动机不能再提供任何扭矩。如果我们对电动机施加负载（例如，要提升的重物），旋转会稍微减慢，因此 $\mathscr{E}_{ind}$ 减小而i增加——源发电机必须提供额外的电功。因此，电动机可以被视为一种将电功（来自驱动发电机）转换为机械功的装置。

真实的发电机和电动机比我们讨论的要复杂一些。一些发电机使用线圈绕组和拾取机制的巧妙几何布置来产生直流电流（其大小可能随时间变化但不改变方向）。类似地，也有使用直流电流或电压运行的直流电动机。尽管如此，基本操作原理与这里讨论的例子相似。

### 示例问题 34-5

一个发电机由一个尺寸为8.4 cm × 15.4 cm的矩形环路组成。它在0.126 T的均匀磁场中，以60.0 Hz的频率绕垂直于磁场方向的轴旋转。环路产生的最大电动势是多少？

**解**
最大电动势由公式34-10在 $\sin \omega t=1$ 时给出：
$$
\begin{aligned}
\mathscr{E}_{max}&=B A \omega \\
&=(0.126\ \text{T})(0.084\ \text{m} \times 0.154\ \text{m})\left(2 \pi \times 60\ \text{s}^{-1}\right) \\
&=0.61\ \text{V}
\end{aligned}
$$

## 34-6 感应电场

假设我们将一个导电导线环置于外部磁场中（如图34-15a所示）。我们假设该磁场在环路面积上具有均匀强度，可以由外部电磁铁建立。通过改变电磁铁中的电流，我们可以改变磁场的强度。

当 $\overrightarrow{B}$ 变化时，通过环路的磁通量随时间变化，根据法拉第定律和楞次定律，我们可以计算环路中感应电动势和感应电流的大小和方向。在磁场开始变化之前，环路中没有电流；当磁场变化时，电荷在环路中流动。为了使电荷开始移动，它们必须被电场加速。这个感应电场随着变化的磁场而出现，根据法拉第定律。

感应电场与任何由静电荷建立的电场一样真实；例如，它对测试电荷施加一个力 $q_{0} \overrightarrow{E}$。此外，电场的存在与导线环的存在无关；如果我们完全移除环路，电场仍然存在。我们可以用电子或电离原子的"气体"填充空间；这些粒子将感受到这个感应电场 $\overrightarrow{E}$。

因此，让我们用任意半径r的圆形路径替换导线环（图34-15b）。该路径，我们取在垂直于 $\overrightarrow{B}$ 方向的平面内，包围了一个磁场以速率 $d \overrightarrow{B} / d t$ 变化的区域。我们假设速率 $d \overrightarrow{B} / d t$ 在路径所包围区域内的每一点都相同。圆形路径包围了一个磁通量 $\Phi_{B}$，由于磁场的变化，该磁通量正以速率 $d \Phi_{B} / d t$ 变化。沿着路径出现感应电动势，因此围绕圆周的所有点都存在感应电场。从对称性，我们得出结论，$\overrightarrow{E}$ 在围绕圆周的所有点必须具有相同的大小，因为在这个空间中没有优先方向。此外，$\overrightarrow{E}$ 不能有径向分量，这个结论来自高斯定律：构造一个垂直于图34-15a平面的假想圆柱形高斯面。如果 $\overrightarrow{E}$ 有径向分量，将会有进入或离开该面的净电通量，这将要求该面包围净电荷。由于没有这样的电荷，电通量必须为零，且 $\overrightarrow{E}$ 的径向分量必须为零。因此，感应电场是切向的，电场线是同心圆，如图34-15c所示。

考虑一个测试电荷 $q_{0}$ 绕图34-15b中的圆形路径运动。感应电场在一圈内对电荷所做的功W是 $\mathscr{E} q_{0}$。等价地，我们可以将功表示为电力 $q_{0} E$ 乘以一圈所覆盖的位移 $2 \pi r$。将W的这两个表达式彼此相等并消去因子 $q_{0}$，我们得到：
$$
\mathscr{E}=E(2 \pi r) \quad(34-11)
$$

公式34-11的右边可以表示为 $\overrightarrow{E}$ 绕圆圈的线积分，在更一般的情况下（例如，当 $\overrightarrow{E}$ 不是常数或所选的闭合路径不是圆时）可以写为：
$$
\mathscr{E}=\oint \vec{E} \cdot d \vec{s} \quad(34-12)
$$

注意，在我们的恒定切向 $\overrightarrow{E}$ 的圆形路径的特殊情况下，公式34-12直接简化为公式34-11。

用公式34-12替换电动势，我们可以将法拉第电磁感应定律（$\mathscr{E}=-d \Phi_{B} / d t$）写为：
$$
\oint \vec{E} \cdot d \vec{s}=-\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t} \quad(34-13)
$$

正是以这种形式，法拉第定律作为电磁学的四个基本麦克斯韦方程之一出现。在这种形式下，很明显法拉第定律意味着变化的磁场会产生电场。线积分的方向与 $\Phi_{B}$ 中 $d \overrightarrow{A}$ 的方向相关，通过第34-3节末尾讨论的同一个右手定则：手指沿着闭合积分路径的 $d \overrightarrow{s}$ 方向，拇指指示 $d \overrightarrow{A}$ 的方向。

在图34-15中，我们假设磁场正在增加：即，$d B / d t$ 和 $d \Phi_{B} / d t$ 都是正的。根据楞次定律，感应电动势反抗这种变化，因此感应电流产生一个指向图平面外的磁场。由于电流必须是逆时针的，感应电场 $\overrightarrow{E}$（负责电流的场）的线也必须是逆时针的。另一方面，如果磁场正在减少（$d B / d t<0$），感应电场的线将是顺时针的，使得感应电流再次反抗 $\Phi_{B}$ 的变化。

以公式34-13形式出现的法拉第定律可以应用于任何几何形状的路径，而不仅仅是我们图34-15a中选择的特殊圆形路径。图34-15d显示了四个这样的路径，它们都具有相同的形状和面积，但位于变化磁场中的不同位置。对于路径1和2，感应电动势是相同的，因为这些路径完全位于变化的磁场内，因此具有相同的 $d \Phi_{B} / d t$ 值。然而，即使对于这两条路径电动势 $\mathscr{E}(=\oint \overrightarrow{E} \cdot d \overrightarrow{s})$ 相同，围绕路径的电场矢量分布是不同的，如电场线所示。对于路径3，电动势较小，因为 $\Phi_{B}$ 和 $d \Phi_{B} / d t$ 都较小，而对于路径4，感应电动势为零，即使沿着路径的任何点电场都不为零。

### 感应电动势与电位差

在第26章中，我们讨论了由电荷产生的电场。感应电场不是由电荷产生，而是由变化的磁通量产生。两种电场都可以通过它们对电荷施加的力来检测，但它们之间有一个重要的区别：与变化磁通量相关的 $\overrightarrow{E}$ 线形成闭合回路，而与电荷相关的 $\overrightarrow{E}$ 线总是起始于正电荷并终止于负电荷。

两种电场之间还有另一个区别：由电荷产生的电场可以用电位表示，但电位对于由变化磁通量产生的电场没有意义。在第28章中，我们证明了电场中两点之间的电位差是（见公式28-15）：
$$
V_{b}-V_{a}=-\int_{a}^{b} \vec{E} \cdot d \vec{s} \quad(34-14)
$$

因为与电荷相关的静电场是保守场，电位差与我们沿着点a和b之间的路径无关。如果a和b是同一点，那么连接它们的路径是一个闭合回路，公式34-14变为：
$$
\oint \vec{E} \cdot d \vec{s}=0 \quad(34-15)
$$

图34-16a阐明了这个概念。如果我们将电压表的两根引线在由电荷产生的场中连接在一起，电压表读数为零。

考虑变化磁场产生的电场的对比情况。在这种情况下，$\overrightarrow{E}$ 围绕闭合路径的积分不为零——现在 $\oint \overrightarrow{E} \cdot d \overrightarrow{s}$ 根据法拉第定律是 $-d \Phi_{B} / d t$。在图34-16b中，电压表的两根引线仍然连接在一起，形成一个环绕着电流正在变化的螺线管的环路。在这种情况下，电压表读数不为零，电位的概念不能用来描述这种情况。由变化磁场产生的感应电场是非保守的，不能用电位表示。（由电流产生的磁场也是非保守的。磁感线形成闭合回路，磁场也不能用电位描述。）

### 示例问题 34-6

在图34-15b中，假设 $R=8.5\ \text{cm}$ 且 $d B / d t=0.13\ \text{T/s}$。(a) 对于 $r=5.2\ \text{cm}$，电场 $\overrightarrow{E}$ 的大小是多少？(b) 对于 $r=12.5\ \text{cm}$，感应电场的大小是多少？

**解**
(a) 通过半径为r的闭合圆形路径的磁通量 $\Phi_{B}$ 为（当 $r<R$ 时）：
$$
\Phi_{B}=B\left(\pi r^{2}\right)
$$
因此法拉第定律（公式34-13）给出：
$$
E(2 \pi r)=-\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}=-\left(\pi r^{2}\right) \frac{d B}{d t}
$$

解出E并取大小，我们得到：
$$
E=\frac{1}{2}\left|\frac{d B}{d t}\right| r \quad(34-16)
$$

注意感应电场E取决于 $dB/dt$ 但不取决于B。对于 $r=5.2\ \text{cm}$，我们得到 $\overrightarrow{E}$ 的大小：
$$
\begin{aligned}
E&=\frac{1}{2}\left|\frac{d B}{d t}\right| r \\
&=\frac{1}{2}(0.13\ \text{T/s})\left(5.2 \times 10^{-2}\ \text{m}\right) \\
&=0.0034\ \text{V/m}=3.4\ \text{mV/m}
\end{aligned}
$$

(b) 在这种情况下，我们有 $r>R$，因此磁铁的整个磁通量都通过圆形路径。因此：
$$
\Phi_{B}=B\left(\pi R^{2}\right)
$$

根据法拉第定律（公式34-13）我们然后找到：
$$
E(2 \pi r)=-\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}=-\left(\pi R^{2}\right) \frac{d B}{d t}
$$

解出E并再次取大小，我们得到：
$$
E=\frac{1}{2}\left|\frac{d B}{d t}\right| \frac{R^{2}}{r} \quad(34-17)
$$

在这种情况下，即使在（变化的）磁场之外很远的点也会感应出电场，这是一个重要的结果，使得变压器（见第37-5节）成为可能。对于 $r=12.5\ \text{cm}$，公式34-17给出：
$$
\begin{aligned}
E&=\frac{1}{2}(0.13\ \text{T/s}) \frac{\left(8.5 \times 10^{-2}\ \text{m}\right)^{2}}{12.5 \times 10^{-2}\ \text{m}} \\
&=3.8 \times 10^{-3}\ \text{V/m}=3.8\ \text{mV/m}
\end{aligned}
$$

公式34-16和34-17在 $r=R$ 时产生相同的结果，正如它们必须的那样。图34-17显示了基于这两个方程的 $E(r)$ 曲线图。

### 电子感应加速器*

电子感应加速器是一种利用变化磁场产生的感应电场将电子（也称为β粒子）加速到高速的装置。典型的电子能量为50-100 MeV。如此高能的电子可用于物理学的基础研究，以及产生工业应用研究和医疗目的（如癌症治疗）的X射线。

图34-18a显示了电子感应加速器内部结构的横截面。磁场形状由磁性材料制成的极片M决定，可以通过改变线圈中的电流来改变磁场。电子在抽真空的环形管中循环。

线圈承载交流电并产生图34-18a所示的磁场。为了使电子以所示方向循环（从上方看为逆时针），磁场必须指向上方（我们取为正）。变化磁场必须具有 $d B / d t>0$，以便 $d \Phi_{B} / d t>0$ 并且电子在周期内被加速（而不是减速）。因此，只有图34-18b的第一个四分之一周期对电子感应加速器的操作有用。电子在 $t=0$ 时进入机器，并在 $t=T / 4$ 时被提取。在剩下的四分之三周期内，电子感应加速器不产生束流。电子感应加速器产生脉冲束流而不是连续束流，脉冲通常每0.01秒一次。

*关于电子感应加速器及类似装置的发展和应用的综述，参见Chris A. Kapetanakos和Phillip Sprangle的《超高电流电子感应加速器》，《今日物理》，1985年2月，第38页。

### 示例问题 34-7

在一个100 MeV的电子感应加速器中，轨道半径R为84 cm。轨道所包围区域内的磁场周期性上升（每秒60次），在四分之一周期或4.2 ms的加速间隔内，从零上升到最大平均值 $B_{av, m}=0.80\ \text{T}$。(a) 电子在这个变化的磁通量中，平均每绕轨道一圈获得多少能量？(b) 电子在加速周期内的平均速度是多少？

**解**
(a) 中心磁通量在加速间隔内从零上升到最大值：
$$
\begin{aligned}
\Phi_{B}&=\left(B_{av, m}\right)\left(\pi R^{2}\right) \\
&=(0.80\ \text{T})(\pi)(0.84\ \text{m})^{2}=1.8\ \text{Wb}
\end{aligned}
$$

加速间隔内 $d \Phi_{B} / d t$ 的平均值则为：
$$
\left(\frac{d \Phi_{B}}{d t}\right)_{av}=\frac{\Delta \Phi_{B}}{\Delta t}=\frac{1.8\ \text{Wb}}{4.2 \times 10^{-3}\ \text{s}}=430\ \text{Wb/s}
$$

根据法拉第定律（公式34-3），这也是以伏特为单位的平均电动势。因此，电子在这个变化的磁通量中平均每圈增加430 eV的能量。要达到其100 MeV的完全最终能量，它必须在其轨道上绕行约230,000圈，总路径长度约为1200 km。

(b) 加速周期的长度给定为4.2 ms，路径长度计算如上为1200 km。则平均速度为：
$$
v_{av}=\frac{1200 \times 10^{3}\ \text{m}}{4.2 \times 10^{-3}\ \text{s}}=2.86 \times 10^{8}\ \text{m/s}
$$

这是光速的95%。完全加速的电子的实际速度，当其达到100 MeV的最终能量时，是光速的99.9987%。

## 34-7 感应与相对运动（可选）

在第33-6节中，我们讨论了将电磁效应分类为纯电性或纯磁性取决于观察者的参考系。例如，在一个参考系中表现为磁场的东西，在另一个参考系中可以表现为电场和磁场的混合。由于动生电动势是由物体在磁场中运动的速度决定的，它显然取决于观察者的参考系。不同惯性系中的其他观察者将测量到不同的速度和不同的磁场强度。因此，在计算感应电动势和电流时，必须指定观察者的参考系。

图34-19a显示了一个闭合环路，一个外部作用者（未显示）使其以速度 $\vec{v}$ 相对于一个磁铁运动，该磁铁在一个区域提供均匀磁场 $B$。观察者 $S$ 相对于用于建立磁场 $\overrightarrow{B}$ 的磁铁静止。在这种情况下，感应电动势是动生电动势，因为导电环路相对于该观察者在运动。

考虑环路左端的一个正电荷载流子。对于观察者 $S$，这个电荷 $q$ 被约束以速度 $\vec{v}$ 随环路向右穿过磁场 $\overrightarrow{B}$ 运动，并且它受到一个由 $\overrightarrow{F}=q \vec{v} ×\overrightarrow{B}$ 给出的磁力（未在图34-19中显示）。这个力导致载流子沿导体向上（在 $y$ 方向）移动；最终，它们获得漂移速度 $\overrightarrow{v}_{d}$，如图34-19a所示。

载流子最终的平衡速度现在是 $\vec{V}$，即 $\vec{v}$ 和 $\overrightarrow{v}_{d}$ 的矢量和。在这种情况下，磁力 $\overrightarrow{F}_{B}$ 是
$$\vec{F}_{B}=q \vec{V} × \vec{B}, \quad(34-18)$$
它（像通常一样）作用在载流子合速度 $\vec{V}$ 的直角方向上，如图34-19a所示。

单独作用时，$\overrightarrow{F}_{B}$ 会倾向于将载流子推过导体的左壁。因为这不会发生，导体壁必须对载流子施加一个法向力 $\vec{N}$（见图34-19a），其大小使得 $\overrightarrow{v}_{d}$ 平行于导线的轴线；换句话说，$\vec{N}$ 恰好抵消了 $\overrightarrow{F}_{B}$ 的水平分量，只留下沿着导体方向的 $F_{B}\cos\theta$ 分量。后一个作用在载流子上的力分量在这种情况下也被载流子以（恒定）速度 $v_{d}$ 漂移通过导线时经历的平均冲力 $F_{i}$ 抵消。

载流子漂移通过导线时的动能保持不变。这与作用在载流子上的合力（$=\overrightarrow{F}_{B}+\overrightarrow{F}_{i}+\overrightarrow{N}$）为零是一致的。$\overrightarrow{F}_{B}$ 所做的功为零，因为磁力，作用在运动电荷速度的直角方向上，不能对该电荷做功。因此，平均内部碰撞力 $\overrightarrow{F}_{i}$ 对载流子所做的（负）功必须恰好被力 $\vec{N}$ 对载流子所做的（正）功抵消。最终，$\vec{N}$ 由拉动环路穿过磁场的那个作用者提供，并且该作用者消耗的机械能作为环路的内能出现，正如我们在第34-4节中看到的那样。

让我们计算在时间 $dt$ 内力 $\vec{N}$ 对载流子所做的功 $dW$；它是
$$dW = N(vdt), \quad(34-19)$$
其中 $vdt$ 是环路（和载流子）在图34-19a中在时间 $dt$ 内向右移动的距离。我们可以写出 $N$（见公式34-18和图34-19a）
$$N = F_{B}\sin\theta=(qVB)\left(v_{d}/V\right)=qBv_{d}. (34-20)$$

将公式34-20代入公式34-19得到
$$\begin{aligned} dW &=\left(qBv_{d}\right)(vdt) \\ &=(qBv)\left(v_{d}dt\right)=qBvds, \quad(34-21) \end{aligned}$$
其中 $ds(=v_{d}dt)$ 是载流子在时间 $dt$ 内沿导体漂移的距离。

当载流子完成环路一圈时，对它所做的功通过对公式34-21绕环路积分得到，是
$$W=\oint dW = qBvD. \quad(34-22)$$

这是因为环路上方和下方的功贡献符号相反且相互抵消，并且在环路不在磁场中的那些部分不做功。

一个对电荷载流子做功，从而在闭合导电环路中建立电流的作用者，可以被视为一个电动势。使用公式34-22，我们找到
$$\mathscr{E}=\frac{W}{q}=\frac{qBvD}{q}=B D v, \quad(34-23)$$
这与我们从法拉第电磁感应定律推导出的结果相同；见公式34-6。因此，动生电动势与带电粒子在磁场中运动时的横向偏转密切相关。

我们现在考虑图34-19a的情况对于一个相对于环路静止的观察者 $S'$ 会是什么样子。对于这个观察者，磁铁在图34-19中以速度 $-\overrightarrow{v}$ 向左运动，并且电荷 $q$ 不随环路在 $x'$ 方向运动，而是顺时针绕环路漂移。$S'$ 测量到一个电动势 $\mathscr{E}'$，在微观层面上，这通过假设移动磁铁的作用在环路中感应出一个电场 $\overrightarrow{E}'$ 来解释。电动势 $\mathscr{E}'$ 与 $\overrightarrow{E}'$ 通过公式34-12相关，
$$\mathscr{E}'=\oint \vec{E}' \cdot d \vec{s} . \quad(34-24)$$

感应场 $\overrightarrow{E}'$，其起源与我们第34-6节讨论的感应场相同，对电荷载流子施加一个力 $q \overrightarrow{E}'$。

产生电流的感应场 $\overrightarrow{E}'$ 仅存在于环路的左端。（当我们绕环路执行公式34-12的积分时，来自 $\overrightarrow{E}'$ 的 $x'$ 分量的贡献在上下两侧抵消，而环路不在磁场中的部分没有贡献。）使用公式34-12我们然后得到
$$\mathscr{E}'=E' D . \quad(34-25)$$

对于速度远小于光速的运动，由公式34-23和34-25给出的电动势必须相同，因为环路和磁铁的相对运动在图34-19所示的两种情况中是相同的。使这些关系相等得到
$$ED = B D v,$$
或
$$E'=v B . \quad(34-26)$$

在图34-19b中，矢量 $\overrightarrow{E}'$ 沿着导电环路左端的轴线指向上方，因为这是观察到正电荷漂移的方向。$\vec{v}$ 和 $\overrightarrow{B}$ 的方向在此图中清晰显示。我们然后看到公式34-26与更一般的矢量关系一致
$$\vec{E}'=\vec{v} × \vec{B} . \quad(34-27)$$

除了图34-19的特殊情况外，我们还没有证明公式34-27；尽管如此，它在一般情况下也是正确的，无论 $\vec{v}$ 和 $\overrightarrow{B}$ 之间的角度如何。

我们以下列方式解释公式34-27。相对于磁铁固定的观察者 $S$ 只知道磁场。对于这个观察者，力源于电荷穿过 $\overrightarrow{B}$ 的运动。相对于电荷载流子固定的观察者 $S'$ 也知道一个电场 $\overrightarrow{E}'$，并将（最初相对于 $S'$ 静止的）电荷上的力归因于电场。$S$ 说力纯粹是磁起源的，而 $S'$ 说力纯粹是电起源的。从 $S$ 的角度看，感应电动势由 $\oint(\overrightarrow{v} ×\overrightarrow{B}) \cdot d \overrightarrow{s}$ 给出。从 $S'$ 的角度看，相同的感应电动势由 $\oint \overrightarrow{E}' \cdot d \overrightarrow{s}$ 给出，其中 $\overrightarrow{E}'$ 是 $S'$ 在沿着电路的点观察到的（感应）电场矢量。

对于第三个观察者 $S''$，相对于他，磁铁和环路都在运动，倾向于使电荷绕环路移动的力既不是纯电的也不是纯磁的，而是两者兼有一点。总之，在方程
$$\vec{F}/q=\vec{E}+\vec{v} × \vec{B}$$
中，不同的观察者对 $\overrightarrow{E}$、$\overrightarrow{B}$ 和 $\vec{v}$ 形成不同的评估，但当这些组合起来时，所有观察者对 $F/q$ 形成相同的评估，并且都获得环路中感应电动势的相同值（这仅取决于相对运动）。也就是说，总力（以及因此的总加速度）对所有观察者都是相同的，但每个观察者对构成相同总力的单独电力和磁力形成不同的估计。

关键点在于，对于一个观察者似乎是磁场的东西，对于另一个在不同惯性参考系中的观察者可能似乎是电场和磁场的混合。然而，两位观察者都同意整体可测量的结果——在图34-19的情况下，就是环路中的电流。我们被迫得出结论，磁场和电场不是相互独立的，并且没有独立独特的存在；它们依赖于惯性系，正如我们在第33-6节中也得出的结论。

本节的所有结果都假设 $S$ 和 $S'$ 之间的相对速度与光速 $c$ 相比很小。如果 $v$ 与 $c$ 相当，则必须应用适当的相对论变换。在这种情况下，我们会发现 $S$ 和 $S'$ 测量的感应电动势将不再相等，并且感应电场不由公式34-27给出。然而，如果我们小心地以适当的相对论方式定义所有量，我们会再次发现电磁学的基本定律，包括法拉第定律，在所有惯性参考系中都成立。事实上，这样的考虑引导爱因斯坦提出了狭义相对论；用狭义相对论的语言，我们说麦克斯韦方程组对于洛伦兹变换是协变的。

## 选择题

34-1 法拉第的实验
34-2 法拉第电磁感应定律
1.  垂直于导线环路的均匀磁场 $B$ 随时间变化如图34-20a所示。图34-20b中的哪个图最能表示环路中感应电流随时间的变化？
2.  一个柔性导电环路呈圆形，半径可变。环路处于垂直于环路平面的均匀磁场中。为了在环路中维持恒定的电动势 $\mathscr{E}$，半径 $r$ 必须随时间如何变化？
    (A) $r(t) \propto \sqrt{t}$
    (B) $r(t) \propto t$
    (C) $r(t) \propto t^{2}$
    (D) $r$ 应该是常数。
3.  一个圆形柔性导线环，其半径随时间线性增长。存在一个垂直于环路平面的磁场，其大小与到环路中心的距离成反比，$B(r) \propto 1/r$。电动势 $\mathscr{E}$ 如何随时间变化？
    (A) $\mathscr{E} \propto t^{2}$
    (B) $\mathscr{E} \propto r$
    (C) $\mathscr{E} \propto \sqrt{t}$
    (D) $\mathscr{E}$ 是常数。
4.  通过导线环路的磁通量在时间 $\Delta t$ 内变化了 $\Delta \Phi_{B}$。通量变化 $\Delta \Phi_{B}$ 与什么成正比？
    (A) 导线中的电流。
    (B) 导线的电阻。
    (C) 流过导线任何横截面的净电荷。
    (D) 导线中任意两个固定点之间的电位差。

34-3 楞次定律
5.  一个条形磁铁穿过一个导线环路下落。图34-21中的哪个图最能显示通过环路的电流随时间的变化？假设负电流指的是反向流动的电流。
6.  图34-2中右侧线圈的电流变化如图34-22a所示。图34-22b中的哪个图最能显示电流表读数随时间的变化？
7.  图34-23中的长直导线载有向右的恒定电流 $i$。导线环路中感应电流的方向是什么？
    (A) 顺时针
    (B) 逆时针
    (C) 没有感应电流。
8.  图34-23中的长直导线载有向右的电流 $i$，该电流随时间增加。导线环路中感应电流的方向是什么？
    (A) 顺时针
    (B) 逆时针
    (C) 没有感应电流。
9.  图34-23中的长直导线载有向右的电流 $i$，该电流随时间线性减小。在时间 $t_{r}$ 电流为零，然后开始向另一个方向线性增加。导线环路中感应电流的方向是什么？
    (A) 顺时针
    (B) 逆时针
    (C) 感应电流开始沿一个方向流动，但在时间 $t$ 停止，然后开始沿另一个方向流动。
    (D) 没有感应电流。
10. 图34-24中的长直导线载有向右的电流 $i$，该电流随时间增加。圆形导线环路（位于垂直于导线的平面内）中感应电流的方向是什么？
    (A) 从右侧看为顺时针
    (B) 从右侧看为逆时针
    (C) 没有感应电流。

34-4 动生电动势
11. 再次考虑图34-23的直导线和环路。直导线载有向右的恒定电流 $i$。
    (a) 环路被外力直接向上拉。环路中感应电流的方向（如果有）是什么？
    (A) 顺时针
    (B) 逆时针
    (C) 没有感应电流。
    (b) 当环路被外力向上拉时，作用在环路上的磁力（如果有）的方向是什么？
    (A) 向上
    (B) 向下
    (C) 向左
    (D) 没有磁力。
    (c) 如果外力将环路向左拉，平行于导线，环路中感应电流的方向（如果有）是什么？
    (A) 顺时针
    (B) 逆时针
    (C) 没有感应电流。

34-5 发电机和电动机
12. 一个人使用手摇发电机点亮一个恒定电阻的灯泡。随着这个人摇动速率的减慢，以下哪个量会减少？
    (A) 电动势
    (B) 电流
    (C) 频率
    (D) 以上其中两个
    (E) 以上所有
13. 考虑一个连接到自行车车轮并连接到一个恒定电阻车灯的自行车发电机。如果蹬踏速度加倍，车灯的功率输出将
    (A) 保持不变。
    (B) 加倍。
    (C) 增加四倍。
    (D) 增加八倍。
14. 电动机在停止时还是旋转时具有更高的有效电阻？
    (A) 旋转时
    (B) 停止时
    (C) 两种情况下有效电阻相同。
15. 在其他条件相同的情况下，如果汽车电池充电过度还是充电不足，您更可能"烧毁"启动电机？
    (A) 如果电池充电过度
    (B) 如果电池充电不足
    (C) 电池的充电状态在这里没有影响。

34-6 感应电场
16. 某区域空间的磁场由 $\overrightarrow{B}=(0.001 ~T / s^{2}) t^{2} \hat{i}$ 给出，适用于 $-2 ~s ≤t ≤2 ~s$。当 $t=0 ~s$ 时，感应电场的方向是什么？
    (A) 平行于 $x$ 轴
    (B) 平行于 $y$ 轴
    (C) 电场是以 $x$ 轴为中心的圆圈。
    (D) 当 $t=0 ~s$ 时没有感应电场。
17. 通过一个无限长螺线管的电流随时间线性增加。
    (a) 螺线管内部的电场是
    (A) 以螺线管轴线为中心的圆圈形式。
    (B) 平行于螺线管的轴线。
    (C) 从圆柱轴线径向向外。
    (D) 零。
    (b) 螺线管外部电场的大小是
    (A) 均匀且非零。
    (B) 径向对称，随着离螺线管的距离增加而减小。
    (C) 径向对称，随着离螺线管的距离增加而增加。
    (D) 零。
18. 一根长直导线载有随时间线性减小的电流。导线外部感应电场的方向是什么？
    (A) 平行于电流
    (B) 与电流相反
    (C) 从导线径向向外
    (D) 径向指向导线向内
    (E) 导线外部没有感应电场。