# Chapter 1.1-1.3

## Section 1.1

### Section Summary

- Propositions
    
- Connectives
    
    - Negation（否定）
        
    - Conjunction（合取）
        
    - Disjunction（析取）
        
    - Implication（蕴含）；Contrapositive（逆否命题）, inverse（反命题）, converse（逆命题）
        
    - Biconditional （双条件命题）
        
- Truth Tables
    

## Propositions

A proposition is a declarative sentence that is either true or false.

### Examples of propositions:

- The Moon is made of green cheese.
    
- Hangzhou is the capital of China.
    
- The teacher exclaimed, “Don’t come into class late again!”
    
- 1 + 0 = 1
    
- 0 + 0 = 2
    

### Examples that are not propositions:

- Sit down!
    
- What time is it?
    
- x + 1 = 2
    
- x + y = z
    

## Propositional Logic

### Constructing Propositions

- Propositional Variables: p, q, r, s, …
    
- The proposition that is always true is denoted by T and the proposition that is always false is denoted by F.
    
- Compound Propositions; constructed from logical connectives and other propositions
    
    - Negation ¬ （NOT）
        
    - Conjunction ∧ （AND）
        
    - Disjunction ∨ （OR）
        
    - Exclusive or operator ⊕ （XOR）
        
    - Implication → （IF-THEN)
        
    - Biconditional ↔ （ IF AND ONLY IF）
        

## Compound Propositions: Negation

The negation of a proposition p is denoted by ¬p and has this truth table:

|p|¬p|
|---|---|
|T|F|
|F|T|

### Example:

If p denotes “The earth is round.”, then ¬p denotes “It is not the case that the earth is round,” or more simply “The earth is not round.”

## Conjunction

The conjunction of propositions p and q is denoted by p ∧ q and has this truth table:

|p|q|p ∧ q|
|---|---|---|
|T|T|T|
|T|F|F|
|F|T|F|
|F|F|F|

### Example:

If p denotes “I am at home.” and q denotes “It is raining.” then p ∧q denotes “I am at home and it is raining.”

## Disjunction

The disjunction of propositions p and q is denoted by p ∨q and has this truth table:

|p|q|p ∨q|
|---|---|---|
|T|T|T|
|T|F|T|
|F|T|T|
|F|F|F|

### Example:

If p denotes “I am at home.” and q denotes “It is raining.” then p ∨q denotes “I am at home or it is raining.”

### The Connective Or in English

In English “or” has two distinct meanings.

#### “Inclusive Or”（兼或）

- In the sentence “Students who have taken CS202 or Math120 may take this class,” we assume that students need to have taken one of the prerequisites, but may have taken both. This is the meaning of disjunction. For p ∨q to be true, either one or both of p and q must be true.
    

#### “Exclusive Or” （异或）

- When reading the sentence “Soup or salad comes with this entrée,” we do not expect to be able to get both soup and salad. This is the meaning of Exclusive Or (Xor). In p ⊕ q , one of p and q must be true, but not both. The truth table for ⊕ is:
    

|p|q|p ⊕q|
|---|---|---|
|T|T|F|
|T|F|T|
|F|T|T|
|F|F|F|

## Implication

If p and q are propositions, then p →q is a conditional statement or implication which is read as “if p, then q ” and has this truth table:

|p|q|p →q|
|---|---|---|
|T|T|T|
|T|F|F|
|F|T|T|
|F|F|T|

### Example:

p: You never sleep in class q: You will pass the final exam In p →q , p is the hypothesis （假设）(antecedent前件 or premise前提) and q is the conclusion（结论） (or consequence后件).

### Understanding Implication

In p →q there does not need to be any connection between the antecedent or the consequent. The “meaning” of p →q depends only on the truth values of p and q.

### Examples:

- “If the moon is made of green cheese, then I have more money than Bill Gates. ”
    
- “If the moon is made of green cheese then I’m on welfare.”
    
- “If 1 + 1 = 3, then your grandma wears combat boots.”
    

### Understanding Implication (cont)

One way to view the logical conditional is to think of an obligation or contract.

- “If I am elected, then I will lower taxes.”
    
- “If you get 100% on the final, then you will get an A.”
    
- If the politician is elected and does not lower taxes, then the voters can say that he or she has broken the campaign pledge. Something similar holds for the professor. This corresponds to the case where p is true and q is false.
    

## Conditional Statement

p → q

### Examples:

- If the earth is round, then 1+1=2.
    
- If the earth is round, then 1+1=3.
    
- If the earth is cubic, then 1+1=2.
    
- If the earth is cubic, then 1+1=3.
    
- If pigs fly, then you can get an A in Discrete Mathematics!
    

### Different Ways of Expressing

- if p, then q
    
- p implies q
    
- p only if q
    
- q unless ¬p
    
- q when p
    
- q if p
    
- q whenever p
    
- p is sufficient for q
    
- q follows from p
    
- q is necessary for p
    
- a necessary condition for p is q
    
- a sufficient condition for q is p
    

## Converse, Contrapositive, and Inverse

From p →q we can form new conditional statements.

- q →p is the converse of p →q
    
- ¬q → ¬ p is the contrapositive of p →q
    
- ¬ p → ¬ q is the inverse of p →q
    

### Example:

Find the converse, inverse, and contrapositive of “It raining is a sufficient condition for my not going to town.”

- Converse: If I do not go to town, then it is raining.
    
- Inverse: If it is not raining, then I will go to town.
    
- Contrapositive: If I go to town, then it is not raining.
    

### Converse of Conditional Statement

- Conditional Statement: p → q
    
- Converse: q → p
    

### Example:

- p → q : If I am going to town, then it is raining.
    
- q → p : If it is raining, then I am going to town.
    

### Truth table

|p|q|p → q|q → p|
|---|---|---|---|
|T|T|T|T|
|T|F|F|T|
|F|T|T|F|
|F|F|T|T|

## Inverse of Conditional Statement

- Conditional statement: p → q
    
- Inverse: ¬p → ¬q
    

### Example:

- p → q : If I am going to town, then it is raining.
    
- ¬p → ¬q : If I am not going to town, then it is not raining.
    

### Truth table

|p|q|p → q|¬p → ¬q|
|---|---|---|---|
|T|T|T|T|
|T|F|F|T|
|F|T|T|F|
|F|F|T|T|

## Contrapositive of Conditional Statement

- Conditional statement: p → q
    
- Contrapositive: ¬q → ¬p
    

### Example:

- p → q : If I am going to town, then it is raining.
    
- ¬q → ¬p : If it is not raining, then I am not going to town.
    

### Truth table

|p|q|p → q|¬q → ¬p|
|---|---|---|---|
|T|T|T|T|
|T|F|F|F|
|F|T|T|T|
|F|F|T|T|

## Biconditional

If p and q are propositions, then we can form the biconditional proposition p ↔q , read as “p if and only if q .” The biconditional p ↔q denotes the proposition with this truth table:

|p|q|p ↔q|
|---|---|---|
|T|T|T|
|T|F|F|
|F|T|F|
|F|F|T|

### Example:

If p denotes “I am at home.” and q denotes “It is raining.” then p ↔q denotes “I am at home if and only if it is raining.”

### Biconditional example

- p : the radius of the two circle are the same
    
- q : the square of the two circle are equivalent
    
- p ↔ q: the radius of the two circle are the same if and only if the square of the two circle are equivalent
    

### Expressing the Biconditional

Some alternative ways “p if and only if q” is expressed in English:

- p is necessary and sufficient for q
    
- if p then q , and conversely
    
- p iff q
    

## Truth Tables For Compound Propositions

### Construction of a truth table:

- Rows
    
    - Need a row for every possible combination of values for the atomic propositions.
        
- Columns
    
    - Need a column for the compound proposition (usually at far right)
        
    - Need a column for the truth value of each expression that occurs in the compound proposition as it is built up.
        
    - This includes the atomic propositions
        

### Example Truth Table

Construct a truth table for p q r ¬r p ∨ q p ∨ q → ¬r

|p|q|r|¬r|p ∨ q|p ∨ q → ¬r|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|T|T|T|F|T|F|
|T|T|F|T|T|T|
|T|F|T|F|T|F|
|T|F|F|T|T|T|
|F|T|T|F|T|F|
|F|T|F|T|T|T|
|F|F|T|F|F|T|
|F|F|F|T|F|T|

## Equivalent Propositions

Two propositions are equivalent if they always have the same truth value.

### Example:

Show using a truth table that the conditional is equivalent to the contrapositive.

|p|q|¬p|¬q|p → q|¬q → ¬p|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|T|T|F|F|T|T|
|T|F|F|T|F|F|
|F|T|T|F|T|T|
|F|F|T|T|T|T|

## Using a Truth Table to Show NonEquivalence

Example: Show using truth tables that neither the converse nor inverse of an implication are not equivalent to the implication.

|p|q|¬p|¬q|p → q|¬p → ¬q|q → p|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|T|T|F|F|T|T|T|
|T|F|F|T|F|T|T|
|F|T|T|F|T|F|F|
|F|F|T|T|T|T|T|

## Problem

How many rows are there in a truth table with n propositional variables?

### Solution:

2^n

### Note:

This means that with n propositional variables, we can construct 2^n distinct (i.e., not equivalent) propositions.

## Precedence of Logical Operators

|Operator|Precedence|
|---|---|
|¬|1|
|∧|2|
|∨|3|
|→|4|
|↔|5|

### Example:

p ∨q → ¬r is equivalent to (p ∨q) → ¬r

### Note:

If the intended meaning is p ∨(q → ¬r ) then parentheses must be used.

## Logic and Bit Operations

In computer all the information is represented with bits (binary digit). Bit is a symbol with two possible values: 0 (zero), and 1(one) bit can be used to represent truth values:1 for True, 0 for False

### Boolean variable

A variable with two possible values (0,1)

### Note:

Computer operations correspond to the logical operations

## Bitwise Operations

### Example:

Find the bitwise OR, bitwise AND, and bitwise XOR of the bit strings 01 1011 0110 and 11 0001 1101.

Copy

```
01 1011 0110
11 0001 1101
11 1011 1111 bitwise OR
01 0001 0100 bitwise AND
10 1010 1011 bitwise XOR
```